16                                THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                  [PART III—SEC.4]

      (x) भारत में खाद्य, स्ट्वास्ट््य और जीजवका सुरिा सजहत प्राथजमकता वाली आवश्यकताओं के जलए अनुसंधान करना, जजसमें
      जैजवक संसाधनों पर ध्यान के जन्रत करना सजममजलत है;

      (xi) व्यजियों को जैजवक संसाधनों की आपूर्थत और उत्तरवती लाभकाठरता यकद कोई है , में योगदान देने वाले िेत्र/जनजाजतयां
      जीवन-यापन लागत आकद सजहत छात्रवृजत्त प्रदान करना तथा भारतीय संस्ट्थाओं को जवत्तीय सहायता प्रदान करना,

      (xii) फायदा दावेदारों के जहत में सहायता के जलए उद्यम पूंजी कोष की स्ट्थापना करना;

      (xiii) सुसंगत बौजद्धक संपदा अजधकारों का संयुि स्ट्वाजमत्व।

      (xiv) वेतन और अजधमान्य जनबंधन, जहां परस्ट्पर सहमजत हो।

                                                                                               डॉ. बी. बालाजी, सदस्ट्य सजचव

                                                                                           [जवज्ञापन-III/4/असा./65/2025-26]


                                     NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY
                                                     NOTIFICATION
                                               Chennai, the 29th April, 2025
         F. No. NBA/Tech/EC/9/14/32/.—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 64 read with sub-section (1)
of section 18 and sub-section (4) of section 21 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (18 of 2003)and in supersession
of the Guidelines on Access to Biological Resources and Associated Knowledge and Benefits Sharing Regulations,
2014, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the National Biodiversity
Authority, with the approval of the Central Government, hereby makes the following regulations, namely:—
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) These regulations may be called the Biological Diversity (Access to
Biological Resources and Knowledge Associated thereto and Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits) Regulations,
2025.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2.Definitions. — (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires,–
     (a) ―Act‖ means the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (18 of 2003);
     (b) "authorised officer" means any officer authorised by the Authority or State Biodiversity Board or Union
     territory Biodiversity Council for the purposes of this regulations;
     (c) ―Authority‖ means the National Biodiversity Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 8
     of the Act;
     (d) ―Board‖ means the State Biodiversity Board established under sub-section (1) of section 22 of the Act;
     (e) ―Committee‖ means a Biodiversity Management Committee established under sub-section (1) of section 41
     of the Act;
     (f) ―Council‖ means the Union territory Biodiversity Council established under sub-section (2) of section 22 of
     the Act;
     (g) ―fee‖ means any fee as specified in the First Schedule to the Biological Diversity Rules, 2024;
     (h) ―rules‖ means the Biological Diversity Rules, 2024;
     (i) ―Tribunal‖ means the National Green Tribunal established by section 3 of the National Green Tribunal
     Act, 2010 (19 of 2010);
     (j) ―upfront payment‖ means any amount to be paid before accessing the biological resource or knowledge
     associated thereto by the applicant.
(2)     The words and expressions used but not defined in these Regulations and defined in the Act or Rules shall
have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Act and Rules.
3. Mode of benefit sharing for accessing biological resource including digital sequence information or
knowledge associated thereto for research or bio-survey and bio-utilisation under section 3 of the Act.—(1) In
case a biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto, having
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                             भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                               17
conservation value or high economic value such as red sanders, sandalwood, agarwood or any other items as decided
by the Authority from time to time, and including threatened species notified under section 38 of the Act, is accessed
for research or for bio-survey and bio-utilisation, the benefit sharing including the upfront payment may be
determined by the Authority:
          Provided that the Authority may also require upfront payment on certain biological resources including
digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto, when accessed for research or for bio-survey and bio-
utilisation, on case to case basis:
         Provided further that in case a biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge
associated thereto, is accessed for conducting academic research, the Authority may waive the benefit sharing
including upfront payment, as it deems fit, on case to case basis.
4. Mode of benefit sharing for access to biological resource or associated knowledge for commercial utilisation
under section 3 of the Act.—(1) When the biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge
associated thereto, is accessed for commercial utilisation, the applicant shall have to pay benefit sharing amount as per
the Table given below:—
                                                         Table
Sl.        Annual turnover of the person            Amount payable on account of benefit sharing for access to
No.             (in Indian rupee)                   biological resource for commercial utilisation(Percentage of
                                                      annual gross ex-factory sale price of product excluding
                                                                         Government taxes)
  (1)                     (2)                                                      (3)
  1.                Up to 5 crore                                                 Nil
  2.          Above 5 crore to 50 crore                                          0.2%
  3.         Above 50 crore to 250 crore                                         0.4%
  4.               Above 250 crore                                               0.6%


(2) Any person having an annual turnover of more than one crore rupees shall submit an annual statement containing
information regarding the biological resource consumed in the financial year in Form A, within three months of
finalisation of annual income tax or corporate tax return in respect of that financial year.
(3) The person liable to pay benefit sharing amount under this regulation shall make the payment digitally through
web portal.
(4) In case of biological resource having conservation value or high economic value such as red sanders, sandalwood,
agarwood or any other items as decided by the Authority from time to time, and including threatened species notified
under section 38 of the Act, the benefit sharing shall not be less than five percent. of the proceeds of the auction or
sale amount or the purchase price, as the case may be, as determined by the Authority on case to case basis, as upfront
payment:
         Provided that in case of biological resource having conservation value or high economic value such as red
sanders, sandalwood, agarwood or any other items as decided by the Authority from time to time, and including
threatened species notified under section 38 of the Act, including digital sequence information or knowledge
associated thereto, the benefit sharing component shall be twenty percent. more than the benefit sharing amount due as
referred under sub-regulation (1) of this regulation.
5. Procedure for prior intimation for commercial utilisation by persons covered under section 7 of the Act.—
(1) Any person who intends to access biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge
associated thereto, for commercial utilisation shall give prior intimation to the Board or Council through a web portal
in Form B along with the fee (two thousand rupees in case of an individual and five thousand rupees in case of an
entity) and the applicant shall also give their consent to the mutually agreed terms and conditions appended to the said
Form.
          Provided that the provisions of section 7 of the Act shall not apply in case of access to cultivated medicinal
plants as notified under section 40 of the Act.
(2) Upon submission of the prior intimation by the applicant, complete in all respect, it shall be disposed of by the
Board or Council, within a period of fifteen days from the date of such submission, by either approving the request
with or without modification in the mutually agreed terms and conditions in Form-C or by rejecting the request along
with reasons for rejection in Form-D:
18                               THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                [PART III—SEC.4]

         Provided that if the applicant does not sign the agreement as modified by the Board or Council, within a
period of fifteen days, the application shall be closed under intimation to the applicant:
          Provided further that the Board or Council may revive the closed application on receipt of payment of half of
the fee as applicable, within a period of ninety days:
        Provided also that the application shall not be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the rejection of the application under sub-regulation (1), may prefer an appeal to the
Tribunal.
(4) If the Board or Council does not respond to the prior intimation Form of the applicant within a period of fifteen
days, it shall be deemed to have been approved for a period of one year.
(5) In case there is a dispute which could not be settled between the applicant and the Board or Council, the matter
shall be referred to the Authority by the Board or Council electronically which shall be disposed of within fifteen
days.
(6) Any person aggrieved by any determination of the benefit sharing or order of the Authority or Board under this
Act may prefer an appeal to the Tribunal.
(7) When the biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto, is accessed
for commercial utilisation, the applicant shall have to pay benefit sharing amount as per the Table given below.—
                                                       TABLE
 Sl.        Annual turnover of the person            Amount payable on account of Benefit sharing for access to
 No.             (in Indian rupee)                   biological resources for commercial utilisation[Percentage of
                                                        annual gross ex-factory sale price of product excluding
                                                                           Government taxes]
  (1)                      (2)                                                      (3)
  1.                  Up to 5 crore                                                 Nil
  2.            Above 5 crore to 50 crore                                          0.2%
  3.          Above 50 crore to 250 crore                                          0.4%
  4.                Above 250 crore                                                0.6%


          Provided that, for persons manufacturing products containing both cultivated and non-cultivated medicinal
plants, the benefit-sharing payment shall not be payable in respect of the products as notified by the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in consultation with the Authority and Ministry of Ayush, from time
to time.
(8) In case of biological resource having conservation value or high economic value such as red sanders, sandalwood,
agarwood or any other items as decided by the Authority from time to time, and including threatened species notified
under section 38 of the Act, the benefit sharing shall not be less than five percent. of the proceeds of the auction or
sale amount or the purchase price, as the case may be, as determined by the Board or Council, on case to case basis, as
upfront payment:
         Provided that in case of biological resource having conservation value or high economic value such as red
sanders, sandalwood, agarwood or any other items as decided by the Authority from time to time, and including
threatened species notified under section 38 of the Act, including digital sequence information or knowledge
associated thereto, the benefit sharing component shall be twenty percent. more than the benefit sharing amount due as
mentioned in sub-regulation (7) of this regulation.
(9) Any person having an annual turnover of more than one crore rupees shall submit an annual statement containing
information regarding the biological resource consumed in the financial year in Form A, within three months of
finalisation of annual income tax or corporate tax return in respect of that financial year.
(10) The person liable to pay benefit sharing amount in terms of this regulation shall make the payment digitally
through web portal.
6. Collection fees.— Any person seeking prior approval or giving prior intimation for access to any biological
resource for commercial purposes, shall pay a collection fee, as may be provided in the model guidelines formulated
under clause (w) of rule 11 of the rules, on the web portal to be paid to the Committee under sub-section (3) of section
41 of the Act.
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                             भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                                19
7. Mode of benefit sharing for sharing or transferring results of research relating to biological resource or
traditional knowledge associated thereto.—(1)The applicant shall, in case of sharing or transfer of results of
research under rule 15 of the rules shall pay to the Authority such monetary benefit or share non-monetary benefit, as
agreed between the applicant and the Authority:
        Provided that in case the monetary benefits have been received by the applicant, on such transfer, the applicant
shall pay to the Authority up to five percent. of the monetary consideration:
         Provided further that in cases of sponsored projects allowed prior to the date of commencement of these
regulations, where no budget had been earmarked for payment of benefit sharing, the sponsoring organisation shall
give an undertaking that in case the results of research are used for commercialisation, the benefits shall be shared
with the Authority and the Indian person availing sponsorship of such projects shall keep the sponsor informed of this
requirement.
(2) Any person covered under section 3 of the Act, who intends to use the results of research relating to biological
resource or traditional knowledge associated thereto, for commercial utilisation, shall pay the benefit sharing amount
to the Authority as provided under sub-regulation (1) of regulation 4.
(3) Any person covered under section 3 of the Act, who intends to use the results of research relating to biological
resource including digital sequence information or traditional knowledge associated thereto, for obtaining intellectual
property rights shall pay to the Authority as given below:–
(i) when the applicant himself uses the intellectual property rights for commercialisation, the monetary benefit sharing
shall be in the range of up to one percent. based on sectoral approach, which shall be worked out on the annual gross
ex-factory sale price of product excluding Government taxes, on case to case basis;
(ii) when the applicant assigns or licenses the intellectual property rights to a third party for commercialisation, the
applicant shall pay to the Authority up to five percent. of the fee received (in any form including the license or
assignee fee) and up to five percent. of the royalty amount received annually from the assignee or licensee, based on
sectoral approach, on case to case basis.
8. Mode of benefit sharing for commercialisation of intellectual property rights by persons covered under
section 3 of the Act.-– (1) The applicant shall pay to the Authority such monetary benefit or share non-monetary
benefit, as agreed between the applicant and the Authority:–
(i) when the applicant himself uses the intellectual property rights for commercialisation, the monetary benefit
sharing shall be in the range of up to one percent. based on sectoral approach, which shall be worked out on the annual
gross ex-factory sale price of the product excluding Government taxes, on case to case basis:
          Provided that in case the traditional knowledge is involved in the invention, the benefit sharing obligation
shall be twenty-five percent. higher than the benefit sharing due:
         Provided further that any person, if upon cease or revocation of the intellectual property rights, intends to
access the biological resource including digital sequence information or traditional knowledge associated thereto, to
be used in the product or process for which intellectual property rights were obtained, for commercial utilisation, shall
seek prior approval, as provided under rule 13 of the rules and share the benefits as referred to under regulation4.
         Explanation. —In the event of the applicant accessing biological resource for commercial utilisation during
         the existence of intellectual property rights, the applicant shall share the benefits only under this regulation;
(ii) when the applicant assigns or licenses the intellectual property rights to a third party for commercialisation, the
applicant shall pay to the Authority up to five percent. of the fee received (in any form including the license or
assignee fee) and up to five percent. of the royalty amount received annually from the assignee or licensee, based on
sectoral approach, on case to case basis.
(2) Any person who intends to access the biological resource including digital sequence information, for
commercialisation of the intellectual property rights, shall apply to the Authority or the Board or Council, as the case
may be.
9. Mode of benefit sharing for commercialisation of intellectual property rights by persons covered under
section 7 of the Act.– The applicant shall pay to the Authority such monetary benefit and or share non-monetary
benefit, as agreed between the applicant and the Authority, as under,–
(i) when the applicant himself uses the intellectual property rights for commercialisation, the monetary benefit
sharing shall be in the range of up to one percent. based on sectoral approach, which shall be worked out on the annual
gross ex-factory sale price of the product excluding Government taxes, on case to case basis:
          Provided that in case the traditional knowledge is involved in the invention, the benefit sharing obligation
shall be twenty-five per cent. higher than the benefit sharing due:
20                               THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                 [PART III—SEC.4]

         Provided further that any person, if upon cease or revocation of the intellectual property rights, intends to
access the biological resource including digital sequence information or traditional knowledge associated thereto, to
be used in the product or process for which intellectual property rights were obtained, for commercial utilisation, shall
seek approval and share the benefits as referred to under regulation 5.
         Explanation. —In the event of the applicant accessing biological resource for commercial utilisation during
         the existence of intellectual property rights, the applicant shall share the benefits only under this regulation.
(ii) when the applicant assigns or licenses the intellectual property rights to a third party for commercialisation, the
applicant shall pay to the Authority up to five percent. of the fee received (in any form including the license or
assignee fee) and up to five percent. of the royalty amount received annually from the assignee or licensee, based on
sectoral approach, on case to case basis.
10. Deposition of novel microbial strain in the repositories outside India for publication.–(1) Any Indian
researcher or scientist who has discovered a novel microbial strain from India and intends to deposit the same in the
repositories outside India for publication in the journals for claiming novelty as per the agreed international
requirements, shall apply on the web portal of the Authority in Form E as appended to these Regulations.
(2) The applicant shall deposit one voucher specimen in the designated repository as required under sub-section (3) of
section 39 of the Act.
(3) The designated repositories in and outside India shall inform any user about the Indian legal requirements for
obtaining prior approval of the Authority for undertaking any research or bio-survey and bio-utilisation or commercial
utilisation as per section 3 of the Act:
        Provided that if any researcher desires to refer to the voucher specimen for taxonomical identification
purposes, such approval is not required.
 (4) The applicant shall submit a copy of the acknowledgement of the receipt of voucher specimen issued by the
 designated repository concerned in India to the Authority.
11. Criteria for determination of benefit sharing. –(1) The benefit sharing by the applicant may be in monetary and
or non-monetary modes, as mutually agreed with the Authority or the Board or Council in consultation with the
Committee or the benefit claimer, on case to case basis, as provided in Form F appended to these regulations.
(2) Determination of benefit sharing under regulations 3, 4, 5,7, 8 and 9 shall be sector specific and based on
considerations such as nature and quantity of biological resource used and its sustainability, ecological impact, nature
of technology applied, potential commercial use of the proposed activity, etc. and the Authority shall specify the
formula for determining the percentage of benefit sharing component including upfront payment to be fixed on case to
case basis, for undertaking different activities:
          Provided that special consideration may be given to cases where access to biological resource including
digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto is for technologies or innovations or products that are
developed leading to intellectual property rights for controlling epidemics, mitigating environmental pollution
affecting human, animal or plant health, or for food security or conservation of biodiversity, and in such cases, the
benefit sharing may be at a lower percentage in the range, as decided by the Authority or the Board or Council, on
case to case basis:
         Provided further that in the event of contribution to non-monetary benefit as mutually agreed, the monetary
benefit sharing obligation, if any, may be reduced, as determined by the Authority or the Board or Council.
(3) The amount of benefit sharing shall remain the same whether the product contains one or more biological
resources.
(4) Where the biological resource is sourced from the jurisdiction of two or more Boards or Councils, the total amount
of the accrued benefits shall be shared with the Boards or Councils concerned, proportionately, on a case to case basis.
12. Sharing of benefits among Authority, Board or Council and benefit claimer.–(1) Where approval has been
granted by the Authority for research or for commercial utilisation or for sharing or transferring results of research or
for intellectual property rights, the mode of benefit sharing shall be as under:—
(a) a minimum of ten percent. to maximum of fifteen percent. of the accrued benefits shall go to the Authority, out of
which half of the amount may be retained by the Authority, as the case may be, and the other half may be shared with
the Board or Council concerned;
(b) the remaining amount of benefit sharing shall be distributed among the benefit claimers including the Committee
and in case where the biological resource including digital sequence information is accessed from an unknown source,
the Authority may retain the full amount of the accrued benefit which may be utilised by the Authority in accordance
with sub-section (2) of section 27 of the Act;
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                             भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                                 21
(c) where the biological resource including digital sequence information and or knowledge associated thereto is
sourced from an individual or a group of individuals or organisations, the amount received under clause (b) shall be
directly transferred to such individual or a group of individuals or organisations, in accordance with the terms and
conditions of any agreement and in such manner as it deems fit.
(2) Where approval has been granted by the Board or Council, the mode of benefit sharing shall be as under:—
(a) a minimum of ten percent. to maximum of fifteen percent. of the accrued benefits shall be retained by the Board or
Council;
(b) the remaining amount of benefit sharing shall be distributed among the benefit claimers including the Committee
and in case the biological resource including digital sequence information is accessed from an unknown source, the
Board or Council may retain the full amount of the accrued benefit, which may be utilised in accordance with sub-
section (2) of section 32 of the Act;
(c) where the biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto is sourced
from an individual or a group of individuals or organisations, the amount received under clause (b) shall be directly
transferred to such individual or a group of individuals or organisations, in accordance with the terms and conditions
of any agreement and in such manner as it deems fit.
(3) The interest earned on the benefit sharing amount deposited in the National Biodiversity Fund or the State
Biodiversity Fund or Union territory Biodiversity Fund shall be utilised as per section 27 and section 32 of the Act, as
the case may be.
(4) All penalties together with interest earned thereof accrued in the National Biodiversity Fund or the State
Biodiversity Fund or the Union territory Biodiversity Fund concerned, shall be used to support conservation and
sustainable use of the biological resources, promote livelihoods of the local people of the area where such biological
resources occur and to undertake various activities to meet the objectives of the Act.
13. The agreement for approvals.––The terms and conditions under the agreement for approval under sections 3, 4,
6 and 7 of the Act shall amongst other things, include the following, namely:–
       (a) general objectives and purpose;
       (b) details of the biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto
       including accompanying information;
       (c) intended uses of the biological resource including digital sequence information or knowledge associated
       thereto;
       (d) terms and conditions for the applicant while obtaining intellectual property rights;
       (e) nature and quantum of monetary or non-monetary benefits;
       (f) restrictions on sharing or transferring the results of research to any third party without prior approval of the
       Authority;
       (g) declaration by the applicant that whenever there is change in the status with regard to sub-section (2) of
       section 3 of the Act, intimation shall be given to the Authority or the Board or Council within a period of sixty
       days;
       (h) undertaking by the applicant to deposit a reference sample of the biological resource to be accessed,
       wherever required by the Authority or Board or Council, with the repositories so designated under section 39;
       (i) submission of periodic status reports by the applicant about research and other developments, as may be
       prescribed by the Authority or Board or Council;
        (j) obligation to abide by the provisions of the Act, rules and regulations, and other related laws in force in the
       country;
       (k) affirmation to facilitate measures for conservation and sustainable use of biological resource to be
       accessed;
       (l) assertion to minimise environmental impacts while collecting the biological resource;
       (m) legal provisions such as duration of the agreement, notice period to terminate the agreement, independent
       enforceability of clauses, provision regarding the extent to which the obligations relating to benefit sharing
       clauses survive the termination of the agreement, events limiting liability (natural calamities, etc.), arbitration,
       confidentiality clause, if any, etc;
       (n) any other condition which the Authority or Board or Council may consider necessary for the purposes of
       the Act.
22                                 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                    [PART III—SEC.4]

14. Reporting compliance with the terms and conditions of approval.– The applicant may submit a compliance
report to the Authority or Board or Council in accordance with the terms and conditions under which approval is
granted.
                                                    FORM A
                                            (see regulation 4 and 5)
Format of Annual statement to be filed by a person or entity covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 or
section 7 of the Act having annual turn-over of more than one crore for disclosing the details of biological
resource or associated knowledge used or consumed for commercial utilisation.
      Sl. No.                    Particulars                                        Information to be furnished
                                                                                         by the applicant
      1.          Category of the applicant                              a.   Individual
                                                                         b.   Entity
      2.          Name and Address of the applicant
                  (address including PIN code, email,
                  mobile)
      3.          Details of the biological resources               i.    Common / scientific name of biological
                  (state-wise)                                       resources
                                                                 ii.      Quantity of biological resources accessed
                                                                iii.      Source of access (wild/cultivated/repositories)
                                                                iv.       Geographical location from where the biological
                                                                     resources are accessed.
      4.          Year of commercial utilisation
      5.          Annual Turnover of the person or entity Upload
                  and proof of annual turn over

                  (duly attested     by     the   Chartered
                  Accountant)


Sl. Product/ Financial Details     of     Prior Annual     Government Annual gross Benefit               sharing
No. Biological year    intimation/approval      gross ex- Taxes paid, if ex-factory sale amount to be paid to
    resources          under Section 7 or factory          any           price     minus Authority/       Board/
                       Section 3(2) of the Act sale price                government       Council (only in
                                                of     the               taxes [7=(5)-(6) respect             of
                                                product                  ]                persons/entity liable
                                                                                          to pay benefit sharing
                                                                                          amount)
                                                                                                        (in INR)
(1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)             (5)                 (6)           (7)                   (8)




                                                          Undertaking
      1.   I declare that the relevant records shall be furnished or shared with the Authority or Board or Council, as and
           when required.
      2.   I further declare that the information provided in the form is true and correct and I shall be liable for any
           incorrect or wrong information and willful suppression of the facts.

      Date:

                                                                                                           Signature with seal
                                                                                                                      Name
                                                              ***
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                              भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                                      23
                                                        FORM B
                                                    (see regulation 5)
Model Application format for prior intimation to the Board or Council for access to biological resources,
digital sequence information or knowledge associated thereto for commercial utilisation by persons covered
under section 7 of the Act.
 1. Particulars of the applicant
 (i) Category of the applicant                                                     (Drop-down menu)
                                                                a.   Individual
                                                                b.   Entity
(ii) Name of the applicant
(iii) Address of the applicant


     (Postal address including PIN code, email,
     mobile and alternate mobile numbers and/or
     landline number)
(iv) Profile of the individual / entity ie. Nature of   Individual- PAN/Aadhar
     the business etc.
                                                        Entity: PAN/CIN No.
(v) Annual Turnover as per the last finalized
    return
(vi) Details of the authorized representative for        PAN/Aadhar
     the applicant


     (Name with postal address including PIN
     code, email, mobile and alternate mobile
     numbers and/or landline number)
 2. Details of the biological resources and knowledge associated thereto intended to be accessed (State-wise)
 (i) Details of biological resource                             (Drop down menu)
                                                           i.        Nature of the biological resource
                                                                     (plants/animals/microbes/genetic
                                                                     material/variety/hybrid/DSI)
                                                          ii.        Common name
                                                         iii.        Scientific name (Genus and species/ variety/strain)
                                                         iv.         Plant parts (Seed, stem, bark, leaf, flower, fruit, root,
                                                                     rhizome, genetic material, extract, exudate, etc.)
                                                          v.         Quantity of each biological resource (in Kg/gm/ml)
                                                         vi.         Duration of access (expected start and end date)
                                                         vii.        Source of access (wild/cultivated/
                                                                     institution/repository/trader/ market)
                                                        viii.        Geographical location (village, taluk, district, state). If
                                                                     procured from a trader institute, their name, address
                                                                     and contact details to be provided; if procured from
                                                                     repository / institution/ database, then origin of
                                                                     collection (passport data) to be provided.
(ii) Details about the knowledge associated thereto: (State-wise)
(a) Nature of the knowledge associated (Oral/
    documented)
24                                THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                 [PART III—SEC.4]

(b) Details of traditional knowledge intended to be
    accessed (in not more than 100 words)
(c) Name of the traditional knowledge holder
    (individual community)
(d) Address of the traditional knowledge holder
    (individual community)
 3. The purpose for which access is required including the type and extent of commercial utilisation being
    derived and expected to be derived from it
 (i) Brief description      about    the   commercial
     utilisation
(ii) Expected duration of commercial utilisation
 4. Whether proposed commercial utilisation                       Yes or No
    is aimed for commercializing the IPR
    obtained                                                      If yes, upload the copy of the approval obtained from
                                                                  the Authority under Section 6(1B) of the Act
 5. Preferred mode of benefit sharing                       i.    Monetary
                                                           ii.    Non-monetary
                                                          iii.    Both
 6. Estimation of benefits that would flow to            (optional)
    the country or communities arising out of
    the use of accessed biological resources
    and knowledge associated thereto
 7. Any other information considered relevant
 8. Details of remittance of application fee
       (Mode of payment, transaction ID, amount,
       date, etc.)
                                                       Declaration
I/We declare that:
     1.   Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not adversely affect the sustainability of the resources;
     2.   Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not entail any environmental impact;
     3.   Collection of the proposed biological resource shall not pose any risk to the ecosystems; and
     4.   Collection of the proposed biological resource and knowledge associated thereto shall not adversely affect
          the local communities.
     5.   I/we agree with the terms & conditions contained in the model mutually agreed terms, as prescribed by the
          Authority and the same has been submitted for the proposed access to biological resource and knowledge
          associated thereto.


     I/We further declare that the information provided in the application form is true and correct to the best of my/our
     knowledge and belief and that it conceals nothing and that no part of it is false. I/We shall be liable for any
     incorrect or wrong information and willful suppression of the facts.


Place                                                      Signature
Date                                                       Name
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                                   भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                          25
                                                           FORM C
                                                       (see regulation 5)
               Approval with or without modifications to the mutually agreed terms and conditions


[From] Office of ___________________________________________
[Address] ________________________________________________
Application Number.…………………                                    Date:…………………………………..


To
          --------------------------------------
          --------------------------------------
Sir/Madam,
        Please refer to your application number……………………..……dated ………………submitted to the State
Biodiversity Board/ Union territory Biodiversity Council seeking approval for accessing biological resources and or
knowledge associated thereto for the purpose of commercial utilisation under section 7 of the Biological Diversity
Act, 2002 (18 of 2003), as amended from time to time.


2.      The State Biodiversity Board/Union territory Biodiversity Council, after examination of the application and
after being heard from the applicant, hereby approves the application in ……………... (Form Number
and Application number) dated …………………… along with the mutually agreed terms and conditions under
section 23(b) and section 24 (2) of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 as amended from time to time.


                                                               or


     The State Biodiversity Board/Union territory Biodiversity Council, after examination of the application and after
being heard from the applicant, hereby approves the application in ……………... (Form Number and Application
number) dated …………………… under section 23(b) and section 24 (2) of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 as
amended from time to time with following modifications in the terms and conditions of mutually agreed terms and
conditions, namely:–


……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………


You are requested to give your consent to the modified terms and conditions as proposed by the Board or Council and
sign the agreementwithin a period of fifteen days failing which your application shall be closed in terms of
regulation 5.
                                  This is issued with the approval of the Competent Authority.


                                                                                                       Member Secretary
                                                     (Name) State Biodiversity Board/Union territory Biodiversity Council,
Copy for information and necessary action:


     1.   …………. (Name) Biodiversity Management Committee.
     2.   A copy to be uploaded on the Website of the State Biodiversity Board.
                                                                    ***
26                                      THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                             [PART III—SEC.4]

                                                             Form D
                                                        (see regulation 5)
                                                       Order of Rejection


[From] Office of ___________________________________________
[Address] ________________________________________________
Application Number.…………………                                     Date:…………………………………..


To
          --------------------------------------
           --------------------------------------
           --------------------------------------
Sir/Madam,


        Please refer to your application number……………………..……dated ………………submitted to the State
Biodiversity Board/Union territory Biodiversity Council seeking approval for accessing biological resources and or
knowledge associated thereto for the purpose of commercial utilisation under section 7 of the Biological Diversity
Act, 2002 (18 of 2003),as amended from time to time.


2. The State Biodiversity Board / Union territory Biodiversity Council, after examination of the application and after
being heard from the applicant, hereby rejects the application in ……………...(Form Number and Application
number) dated ……………………under section 23(b) and section 24 (2) of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 as
amended from time to time, due to the following reasons:–


……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………


3. As per section 52A of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 as amended from time to time, you may file an appeal to
the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, within a period of
30 days from the date of communication of the issue of this order.


                                   This is issued with the approval of the Competent Authority.
                                                                                                         Member Secretary
                                                     (Name) State Biodiversity Board / Union territory Biodiversity Council,


Copy for information and necessary action:
     1.    …………. (Name) Biodiversity Management Committee.
     2.     A copy to be uploaded on the Website of the State Biodiversity Board.


                                                               ***
[भाग III—खण्ड 4]                              भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण                                               27
                                                         FORM E
                                                  (See regulation 10)
 Application for giving prior intimation to the National Biodiversity Authority for deposition of microorganism
   by an Indian researcher in repositories outside India for claim of discovery of novel strain from India for
                                                   publication



Sl.                                        Particulars                                            Information to be
                                                                                                      furnished
No.

1. Name of the applicant (Depositor)

2. Category of the applicant                                                                  (a) Individual researcher
                                                                                              (b) Institution

3. Complete address with contact details
      (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and
      or landline number)

4. Name of the microorganism to be deposited in the foreign repository

5. Geographical location from where the microorganism was/ were collected

6. Name and contact details of the foreign repository from where the biological resource
   are to be deposited
       (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and
      or landline number)

7. Name and contact details of the Indian repository where the biological resources are
   deposited
      (Postal address including PIN code, email, mobile and alternate mobile numbers and
      or landline number)

8. Accession number allotted by the Indian repository to the deposited microorganism



                                                      Declaration
I/We………declare that I shall inform the foreign repository that any non-Indian user to access the microorganism so
deposited with the repository for undertaking research or for bio-survey and bio-utilisation or for commercial
utilisation shall obtain prior approval from the National Biodiversity Authority as per the provisions of the Act.


I further declare that I am not a person covered under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act.


I also declare and solemnly affirm that the information provided above is true and correct to the best of my knowledge
and belief. I/We shall be liable for any incorrect or wrong information and willful suppression of the facts.


Place:
Date:
                                                                                 Signature of the applicant (depositor)
                                                           ***
28                                THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY                                        [PART III—SEC.4]

                                                         FORM F
                                       Fair and equitable benefit sharing options
                                                   (See regulation 11)
The following options, either one or more, may be applied in accordance with mutually agreed terms between the
applicant and the National Biodiversity Authority or State Biodiversity Board or Union territory Biodiversity Council,
on case to case basis, in accordance with the provisions of sections 21 and 23 of the Act. These options are indicative
in nature and other options, as approved by the National Biodiversity Authority in consultation with the Central
Government, may also be adopted:
(a) Monetary benefits options:
     i.   Upfront payment;
  ii.     One-time payment;
 iii.     Milestone payments;
 iv.      Share of the royalties and benefits accrued;
  v.      Share of the license fees;
 vi.      Contribution to National or State or Union territory or Local Biodiversity Funds;
 vii.     Funding for research and development in India;
viii.     Joint ventures with Indian institutions and companies.
(b) Non-monetary benefits options:
     i.   Providing institutional capacity building, including training on sustainable use practices, creating
          infrastructure (including disposal of waste/composting for a clean environment, providing safe drinking
          water/solar powered lights) and undertaking development of works related to conservation and sustainable
          use of biological resources;
  ii.     Transfer of technology or sharing of research and development results with Indian institutions/
          individuals/entities; providing green technologies to the local people/communities;
 iii.     Remediation and restoration activities to prevent habitat destruction or pollution or contamination of areas;
 iv.      Strengthening of capacities for developing technologies and transfer of technology to India and/or
          collaborative research and development programmes with Indian institutions/individuals/entities;
  v.      Contribution/collaboration related to education and training in India on conservation and sustainable use of
          biological resources;
 vi.      Setting up of production, research, and development units/facilities contributing to the local economy and
          income generation for the local communities;
 vii.     Taking appropriate measures for conservation and protection of species including rare, endangered and
          threatened species by raising nurseries and/or plantations in the area from where biological resources have
          been accessed;
viii.     Instituting studies/projects on inventorisation and resource assessment of biodiversity;
 ix.      Sharing of scientific information relevant to conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity
          including biological inventories and taxonomic studies;
  x.      Conducting research directed towards priority needs in India including food, health and livelihood security
          focusing on biological resources;
 xi.      Providing scholarships including living costs, etc., to individuals and financial aid to Indian institutions
          preferably to regions, tribes/sects contributing to the delivery of biological resources and subsequent
          profitability, if any;
 xii.     Setting up of venture capital fund for aiding the cause of benefit claimers;
xiii.     Joint ownership of relevant intellectual property rights;
xiv.      Salaries and preferential terms where mutually agreed.
                                                                                           Dr. B. BALAJI, Member Secy.
                                                                                         [ADVT.-III/4/Exty./65/2025-26]




              Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
                                and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. SARVESH KUMAR
                                                                                                     Digitally signed by SARVESH KUMAR
                                                                                                     SRIVASTAVA
                                                                                               SRIVASTAVA
                                                                                                     Date: 2025.04.30 22:25:32 +05'30'
