                                        *THE DRUGS RULES, 19451
                                           [21st December, 1945]
               [As amended vide G.S.R. 823(E) dated 17-11-2022 (w.e.f. 01-08-2023]

   In exercise of the powers conferred by 2[sections 6(2), 12, 33 and 33(N)] of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), the Central Government is
pleased to make the following Rules:—

                                                       PART I
                                                    PRELIMINARY

    1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) These Rules may be
called the Drugs 3[***] Rules, 1945.

(2) They extend to the whole of India 4[***].
     5
         [***]

   2. Definitions.—In these Rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context—

(a) "the Act" means the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), as
amended from time to time;
           6
            [(aa) "biopharmaceutical classification system" means a system used to
           classify drugs on the basis of solubility and permeability, classified as
           category I-high solubility and high permeability, category II-low
           solubility and high permeability, category III-high solubility and low
           permeability, and category IV-low solubility and low permeability;]
           7
            [(b) "Central Licence Approving Authority" means the Drugs Controller,
           India, or the Joint Drugs Controller (India) or the Deputy Drugs
           Controller (India) appointed by the Central Government;]

           (c) "Director" means the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory;

           (d) "Form" means a Form set forth in Schedule A;
           8
           [(dd) "Homoeopathic medicines" include any drug which is recorded in
           Homoeopathic provings or therapeutic efficacy of which has been

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 1 of 859
          established through long clinical experience as recorded in authoritative
          Homoeopathic literature of India and abroad and which is prepared
          according to the techniques of Homoeopathic pharmacy and covers
          combination of ingredients of such Homoeopathic medicines but does not
          include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route;]

          (e) "Laboratory" means the Central Drugs Laboratory;
          9
           [(ea) "Marketer" means a person who as an agent or in any other
          capacityadopts any drug manufactured by another manufacturer under an
          agreement for marketing of such drug by labeling or affixing his name on
          the label of the drug with a view for its sale and distribution;]
          10 11
           [ [(eb)] "registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner" means a
          person who is registered in the Central Register or a State Register of
          Homeopathy;]
          12 13
            [ [(ec)] "Phytopharmaceutical drug" includes purified and standardised
          fraction with defined minimum four bio-active or phyto-chemical
          compounds (qualitatively and quantitatively assessed) of an extract of a
          medicinal plant or its part, for internal or external use of human beings or
          animals for diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease
          or disorder but does not include administration by parenteral route.]
          14
               [(ee) "Registered medical practitioner" means a person—

                     (i) holding a qualification granted by an authority specified or
                     notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916
                     (7 of 1916), or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical
                     Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956); or

                     (ii) registered or eligible for registration in a medical register of a
                     State meant for the registration of persons practicing the modern
                     scientific system of medicine 15[excluding the Homoeopathic
                     system of medicine]; or

                     (iii) registered in a medical register 15[other than a register for the
                     registration of Homoeopathic practitioners] of a State, who
                     although not falling within sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) is


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 2 of 859
                     declared by a general or special order made by the State
                     Government in this behalf as a person practicing the modern
                     scientific system of medicine for the purposes of this Act; or

                     (iv) registered or eligible for registration in the register of dentists
                     for a State under the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948); or

                     (v) who is engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine and
                     who possesses qualifications approved by the State Government;]
          16
            [(f) 'retail sale' means a sale 17[whether to a hospital, or a dispensary, or
          a medical, educational or research institute or to any other person] other
          than a sale by way of wholesale dealing;]
          18
           [(g) 'sale by way of wholesale dealing' means sale to a person for the
          purpose of selling again and includes sale to a hospital, dispensary,
          medical, educational or research institution;]
          19
               [(h) "Schedule" means a Schedule to these Rules;]
          18
             [(i) State Government in relation to a Union Territory means the
          Administrator thereof;]
          20
             [***]
                                     PART II
                       THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY


3. Functions.—Itshall be the function of the Laboratory—

          (i) to analyse or test such samples of drugs as may be sent to it under sub-
          section (2) of section 11, or under sub-section (4) of section 25 of the
          Act;

          [***]21

          (iii) to carry out such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central
          Government or, with the permission of the Central Government, by a
          State Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory
          Board.



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 3 of 859
had failed to comply with any of the conditions of the approval or with any
provision of the Act or the rules made thereunder.

   (2) Any approved institution whose approval has been suspended or
withdrawn may within three months of the date of the order, appeal to the State
Government which shall dispose of the appeal in consultation with a panel of
competent persons appointed by it in this behalf and notified in the Official
Gazette.]
                              701
                                 [PART XVI
            MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC
                    702
                        [SIDDHA] OR UNANI DRUGS

    151. Manufacture on more than one set of premises.—If Ayurvedic
703
   [Siddha] or Unani drugs are manufactured on more than one set of premises,
a separate application shall be made and a separate licence shall be obtained in
respect of each such set of premises.

   152. Licensing authorities.—-For the purpose of this Part the State
Government shall appoint such licensing authorities and for such areas as may
be specified in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.
      704
      [153. Application for licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or
Unani drugs.—(1) An application for the grant of licence to manufacture for
sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, shall be made—

              (a) as defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act, in Form 24D to
              the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees two thousand; and

              (b) as defined in sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Act, in
              Form 24D to the licensing authority alongwith a fee of mpees three
              thousand for the first ten products and after the said ten products, an
              additional fee of rupees two thousand per product, through the portal e-
              AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in ) as per the format provided in
              the said portal, pertaining to the licence for manufacture for sale of
              Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

  Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to licence obtained under Form
25D prior to the date of commencement of the Drugs (4th Amendment) Rules,
2021 and such licence holder having a Good Manufacturing Practices


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 167 of 859
Certificate on the date of its renewal has to deposit a onetime licence retention
fee of rupees one thousand for existing licenced drugs falling under clause (a) of
section 3 of the Act; and rupees one thousand for first ten products and a fee at
the rate of rupees one thousand per product over and above the said first ten
products for existing licenced drugs falling under sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of
section 3 of the Act.

   Provided further that till the portal e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in)
shall come to effect within six months of the commencement of the Drugs (4th
Amendment) Rules, 2021 and during this period either of online and offline
process of licence application shall be accepted.]
     705
      [153A.Application for loan licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha
or Unani drugs.—(1) An application for grant of a loan licence to manufacture
for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, shall be made—

              (a) as defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act, in Form 24E to
              the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees two thousand; and

              (b) as defined in sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Act, in
              Form 24E to the licensing authority alongwith a fee of rupees three
              thousand for the first ten products and after the said ten products, an
              additional fee of rupees two thousand per product, through the portal e-
              AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in
              the said portal, pertaining to the loan licence for manufacture for sale
              of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs:

   Provided that this rule shall not be applicable to licence obtained under Form
25E prior to the date of commencement of the Drags (4th Amendment) Rules,
2021 and such licence holder having a Good Manufacturing Practices
Certificate of the manufacturing facilitieshe intends to avail on the date of
renewal of its licence has to deposit a onetime licenceretention fee of rupees one
thousand for existing licenced drags falling under clause (a) of section 3 of the
Act; and rupees one thousand for first ten products and a fee at the rate of
rupees one thousand per product over and above the said first ten products for
existing licenced drags falling under sub clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of
the Act.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 168 of 859
   Provided further that till the portal e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in)
shall come to effect within six months of the commencement of the Drugs (4th
Amendment) Rules, 2021 and during this period either of online and offline
process of licence application shall be accepted.

   Explanation—For the purposes of this rule, a "loan licence" means a licence
issued by the Licensing Authority to an applicant who does not have his own
arrangements for manufacture but intends to avail himself of the manufacturing
facilities owned by a licencee in Form 25D.

    153B. Application for Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing unit.—(1) An application
for the grant of a Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for Ayurvedic,
Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing unit shall be made in Form 24E-1 to the
licensing authority along with a fee of rupees five thousand.

   (2) Every application in Form 24E-1 shall be made for a unit having
premises and other requirements as prescribed under Schedule T.

   (3) The application shall be made through portal e-AUSHADHI (www.e-
aushadhi.gov.in ) as per the format provided in the said portal, pertaining to the
Good Manufacturing Practices for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs
manufacturing units.]
     706
      [154.Form of licence to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drugs.—(1) Subject to the conditions of rule 157 being fulfilled, a licence to
manufacture for sale of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drags shall be issued in
Form 25D within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the
application or from the date of compliance by the applicant of shortcomings, if
any, highlighted by the licensing authority, as the case may be.

    (2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the licensing authority
after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Systems of
medicine, as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this
behalf.

   (3) The application shall be processed through portal e-AUSHADHI
(www.e-ajshadhi.gov.in) and the licence in Form 25D shall be issued online as
per the format provided in the said portal.]


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 169 of 859
     707
      [154A. Form of loan licence to manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic,
Siddha or Unani drugs.—(1) A loan licence to manufacture for sale of any
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs shall be issued in Form 25E within a period
of two months from the date of receipt of the application or from the date of
compliance of shortcomings, if any, highlighted by the licensing authority, as
the case may be.

    (2) A licence under this rule shall be granted by the Licensing Authority
after consulting such expert in Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani systems of
medicine, as the case may be, which the State Government may approve in this
behalf.

   (3) The Licensing Authority after being satisfied that the manufacturing
unit licenced under Form 25D has adequate equipment, staff and capacity for
manufacture and facilities for testing, to undertake the manufacture on behalf of
the applicant for a loan licence shall grant a loan licence.

   (4) The application shall be processed through portal e-AUSHADHI
(www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) and licence in Form 25E shall be issued online as per
the format provided in the said portal.]

     155. 708[***]

     155A. 709[***]
     710
      [155B. Certificate of award of Good Manufacturing Practices
Ayurveda, Siddha and Uriani Drugs.—711[(1)] The certificate of Good
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) to manufacturers of Ayurved-Siddha or Unani
drugs shall be issued 712[in Form 26E-1] to licensee who comply with the
requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) of Ayurveda, Siddha and
Unani drugs as laid down Schedule T.]

     (2) 713[***]
     714
    [156. Duration of licence.—(1) A licence issued in Form 25D shall
remain valid perpetually:

   Provided that the licencee shall submit a self-declaration of adherence to the
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 170 of 859
rules made thereunder, every year from the date of issue of licence in Form 25
D or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be:

     Provided further that such self-declaration shall be made within three
months, of completion of one year from the date of issue of licence in form 25
D or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be,
and in the event of non-submission of such self-declaration, within the time
mentioned in the licence of the said product shall be suspended temporarily and
if the licensee fails to submit the self-declaration within a further period of three
months, the licence of the said product shall be deemed to have been cancelled.]
      715
       [156A. Duration of loan licence.—A loan licence issued in Form 25E
shall remain valid perpetually:

    Provided that the licencee shall submit a self-declaration of adherence to the
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the
rules made thereunder, every year from the date of issue of licence in form 25 E
or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be.

     Provided further that such self-declaration shall be made within three
months, of completion of one year from the date of issue of licence in form 25 E
or from the date of submission of last self-declaration, as the case may be, and
in the event of non-submission of such self-declaration, within the time
mentioned in the Licence of the said product shall be suspended temporarily and
if the licensee fails to submit the self-declaration within a further period of three
months, the licence of the said product shall be deemed to have been cancelled.

    156B. Duration of Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices for
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs manufacturing units—(1) A certificate
issued in form 26E-1 shall remain valid unless it is cancelled by the Licensing
Authority subject to deposit of a certificate retention fee of rupees one thousand
before the expiry of a period of every succeeding five years from the date of its
issue.

    (2) If the licencee fails to pay certificate retention fee on or before the due
date as referred to in sub-rule (1), he shall be liable to pay certificate retention
fee alongwith a late fee calculated at the rate of two per cent of the certificate
retention fee for every month or part thereof up to six months, and in the event



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 171 of 859
of non-payment of such fee, the certificate shall be deemed to have been
cancelled.

    156C.Inspection for grant of licence and verification of compliance.—
(1) Before a certificate in Form 26E-1 is granted, the licensing authority shall
cause the establishment in which the manufacture of drugs is proposed to be
conducted or being conducted to be inspected by one or more inspectors
appointed by the State Government under this Act, with or without an expert in
the field concerned and the inspector or inspectors shall examine the
establishment intended to be used or being used for the manufacture of drugs.

   (2) The inspectors shall verify the self-declaration of adherence to the
conditions of licence and the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the
Drugs Rules once in five years or as needed as per risk based approach.

    Provided that the inspectors are allotted the inspection duty in a randomized
manner ensuring that the same inspector is not assigned inspection of a
particular establishment consecutively for two terms of not less than five years’
duration.

   Provided further that if the premises is not inspected within the period of the
validity of the GMP certificate or even after submission of retention fee, the
GMP certificate shall be deemed to be continued for further term of five years.

    156D. Report by Inspector.—(1) The Inspector or Inspectors shall examine
all areas of the premises, plant and appliances and also inspect the process of
manufacture intended to be employed or being employed along with the means
to be employed or being employed for standardizing and testing the drugs to be
manufactured or being manufactured and enquire into the professional
qualifications of the technical staff to be employed and he shall also examine
and verify the statements made in the application in regard to their correctness,
and the capability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of
competent technical staff, manufacturing plants, testing equipments and the
Requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices and Plant and Equipments as
laid down in Schedule T.

   (2) The Inspector after completion of his inspection shall forward a detailed
report giving his findings on each aspect of inspection alongwith his
recommendations, to the Licensing Authority.


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 172 of 859
    156E. Procedure of Licensing Authority.—(1) If the Licensing Authority
after such further enquiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, and after being
satisfied that the requirements of the provisions referred to in the rules under the
Act have been complied with and that the conditions of the licence shall be
observed, shall issue a licence under this Part.

   (2) If the Licensing Authority is not satisfied of the requirements under
sub-rule (l), shall issue a memorandum of shortcoming, and the conditions
which shall be satisfied before a licence is granted and shall supply the
applicant a copy of the inspection report.

   (3) The applicant within two months of issue of such memorandum under
sub-rule (2) shall reply the same.

   (4) On non-submission of requirements under sub-rule (2), the Licensing
Authority shall reject the application and shall inform the applicant, the reasons
for such rejection.

   (5) For this purpose, the licensing authority shall intimate the applicant and
process the application through portal e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in).

    156F. Further application after rejection.—If the applicant, within a
period of six months from the rejection of an application for a licence or
Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices, as the case may be, informs the
Licensing Authority that the conditions laid down have been complied with and
deposit an inspection fee of rupees one thousand, the Licensing Authority may,
after a further inspection, if any, is satisfied that the conditions for the grant of a
licence or certificate have been complied with, issue a licence or certificate
under thus Part.]

   157. Conditions for the grant 716[***] of a licence in Form 25D.—Before
a licence in Form 25D is granted 717[***], the following conditions shall be
complied with by the applicant, namely:—

       (1) The manufacture of Ayurvedic 718[Siddha] or Unani drugs shall be
       carried out in such premises and under such hygienic conditions as are
       specified in Schedule T.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 173 of 859
       719
          [(1A) For issuing of the certificate of Good Manufacturing Practices, the
       Licensing Authority shall verify the requirements as per Schedule T and
       issue the Good Manufacturing Practices certificate in Form 26E-I,
       simultaneously along with grant 720[***] of Licence in Form 25D.]
       721
          [(1B) No manufacturer shall use any prefix or suffix with the name of
       any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb drug falling under clause (a) of
       section 3 of the Act, except as described in the authoritative books specified
       in the First Schedule to the Act:

          Provided that a formulation without any specific name, described in the
       authoritative books may be named on the basis of the ingredients of that
       formulation.]

       (1C) The name of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb drug falling under
       clause (a) of section 3 of the Act shall not be used for naming any patent or
       proprietary medicine relating to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems
       of medicine referred to in sub-clause(i) of clause (h) of the said section:

           Provided that this rule shall not be applicable for single plant-ingredient
       based Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb formulation Licensed or to be
       Licensed as patent or proprietary medicine under sub-clause (i) of clause
       (h) of section 3 of the Act.
       722
         [(1D) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-rules (IB) and (1C)
       shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the Act.]

     (1E) 723[***]

(2) The manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be
conducted under the direction and supervision of competent technical staff
consisting at least of one person, who is a whole-time employee and who
possesses the following qualification, namely:—

          (a) a degree in Ayurveda or Ayurvedic Pharmacy, Siddha or Unani
          system of medicine, as the case may be, conferred by a University, a State
          Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils and Boards of Indian
          Systems of Medicine recognised by the Central Government or a State
          Government for this purpose, or


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 174 of 859
           (b) a diploma in Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani system of medicine granted
           by a State Government or an Institution recognised by the Central
           Government for this purpose, or

           (c) a graduate in Pharmacy or Pharmaceutical Chemistry or Chemistry
           or Botany or a University recognised by the Central Government with
           experience of at least two years in the manufacture of drugs pertaining to
           the Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani system of medicine, or

           (d) a Vaid or Hakim registered in a State Register of Practitioners of
           indigenous system of medicines having experience of at least four years in
           the manufacture of Siddha or Unani drugs, or

           (e) a qualification as Pharmacist in Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or
           Unani systems of medicine, possessing experience of not less than eight
           years in the manufacture of Ayurvedic or Siddha or Unani drugs as may
           be recognised by the Central Government.

(3) The competent technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of
Ayurvedic drugs shall have qualifications in Ayurveda and the competent
technical staff to direct and supervise the manufacture of Siddha drugs and
Unani drugs shall have qualifications in Siddha or Unani, as the case may be.
     724
      [157A. Maintaining of records of raw material used by licensed
manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs in the preceding
financial year.—Each licensed manufacturing unit of Ayurveda or Siddha or
Unani drugs shall keep a record of raw material used by each licensed
manufacturing unit of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs, as the case may be, in
the performa given in Schedule TA in respect of all raw materials utilized by
that unit in the manufacture of Ayurveda or Siddha or Unani drugs in the
preceding financial year, and shall submit the same by the 30 th day of June of
the succeeding financial year to the State Drug Licensing Authority of
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and to the National Medicinal Plants Board
or any agency nominated by the National Medicinal Plant Board for this
purpose:]
     725
    [Provided that the apphcant shall submit the record online through portal
e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in the said



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 175 of 859
portal and such records shall be retained by the manufacturer for a period of one
year after the submission.]

   158. Conditions of licence.—A licence in Form 25D shall be subject to
the conditions stated therein and to the following further conditions,
namely:—

      (a)   The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of
      manufacture and of the tests, if any, carried out by him, or by any other
      person on his behalf, of the raw materials and finished products.

      (b) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to enter
      any premises where the manufacture of a substance in respect of which the
      licence is issued is carried on, to inspect the premises, to take samples of the
      raw materials as well as the finished products, and to inspect the records
      maintained under these rales.
      726
        [(c) The applicant and inspector shall submit the record online through e-
      AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) portal as per the format provided in
      the said portal.]
    727
     [158A. Conditions of loan licence.—A licence in Form 25E shall be
subject to the following further conditions, namely:—

      (a) The licence in Form 25E shall be deemed to be cancelled or
      suspended, if the licence owned by the licensee in Form 25D whose
      manufacturing facilities have been availed of by the licensee is cancelled or
      suspended, as the case may be, under these rules.

      (b) The licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Act and of the
      rules and with such further requirements if any, as may be specified in any
      rules subsequently made under Chapter IVA of the Act, provided that where
      such further requirements are specified in the rules, these would come into
      force four months after publication in the Official Gazette.

      (c)    The licensee shall maintain proper records of the details of
      manufacture and of the tests, if any, carried out by him, or any other person
      on his behalf, the raw materials and finished products.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 176 of 859
      (d) The licensee shall allow an Inspector appointed under the Act to
      inspect all registers and records maintained under these rules and shall
      supply to the Inspector such information as he may require for the purpose
      of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act and the rules have been
      observed.]
      728
        [(e) The applicant and inspector shall submit the record online through e-
      AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) portal as per the format provided in
      the said portal.]
    729
      [158B. Guidelines for issue of license with respect to Ayurveda, Siddha
or Unani drags.—I. (A) Ayurveda, Siddha Unani Medicines under section
3(a):— Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs includes all medicines intended for
internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or
prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured
exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in the authoritative books
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine, as specified in the
First Schedule;

(B) Patent or proprietary medicine under section 3(h)—

      (i) In relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb system of medicine of
      all formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae
      described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb
      system of medicines specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a
      medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation
      included in the authoritative books as specified in clause (a);

      (ii)    Balya/Poshak/Muqawi/Unavuporutkal/posilive health Promoter
      formulations having ingredients mentioned in books of First Schedule of the
      Drugs and Cosmetics Act and recommended for promotional and preventive
      health;

      (iii)  Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza)/Azhagh-sadhan formulation
      having ingredients mentioned in Books of First Schedule of the Drugs and
      Cosmetics Act and recommended for oral, skin, hair and body care;




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 177 of 859
       (iv) Aushadh Ghana (Medicinal plant extracts - dry/wet) extract obtained
       from plant mentioned in books of First Schedule of the Act including
       Aqueous or hydro-alcohol.

 II. (A) For issue of licence to the medicine with respect to Ayurvedic, Siddha
 and Unani, the conditions relating to safety study and the experience or
 evidence of effectiveness shall be such as specified in columns (5) and (6) ot
 The Table given below:—

   Serial                                Ingredient          Indication            Safety               Experience / Evidence of
                    Category
  number                                    (S)                  (s)               study                     Effectiveness
      (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)                  (5)                          (6)
                                                                                                      Published         Proof of
                                                                                                      Literature      Effectiveness
               (A) Ayurveda,
               Siddha         and
                                                                                   Not
      1.       Unani       drugs, As per text               As per text                                Required       Not Required
                                                                                 Required
               given in 158B as
               referred in 3(a)
               (B) Any change
               in dosage form
               of     Ayurveda,
               Siddha      and
               Unani drugs as                                                      Not
      2.                        As per text                 As per text                                Required       Not Required
               described     in                                                  Required
               section 3(a) of
               the Drugs and
               Cosmetics Act,
               1940
               (C) Ayurveda,
               Siddha       and
               Unani      drugs                                                    Not                    If
 3.                             As per text                New                                                      Required
               referred in 3(a)                                                  Required              Required
               to be used for
               new indication


     II. (B) For issue of license with respect to Patent or Proprietary medicine.
 The condition relating to Safety studies and experience or evidence of
 effectiveness shall be specified as follows:—

 Serial                               Ingredient       Indication             Safety                  Experience / Evidence of
                  Category
number                                   (S)               (s)                study                        Effectiveness



 Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India                Page 178 of 859
 Serial                               Ingredient       Indication             Safety                  Experience / Evidence of
                  Category
number                                   (S)               (s)                study                        Effectiveness
  (1)                 (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)                             (6)
                                                                                               Published        Proof               of
                                                                                               Literature       Effectiveness
                                                                                                                *Pilot study as per
             Patent or                                                                                          relevant protocol
                                                      Textual          Not                     Of
   1.        Proprietary            As per text                                                                 for      Ayurveda,
                                                      rationale        Required                Ingredients
             medicine                                                                                           Sidha and Unani
                                                                                                                drugs.
             Ayurveda,
             Siddha, Unani
             drug with any
             of           the
   2.        ingredients of As per text               Existing         Required                Required         Required
             Schedule E(l) of
             The Drugs and
             Cosmetics Act,
             1940.


 III. For issue of license with respect to Balya and Poshak medicines the
 person who applied for license is required to submit the following:
       (i) Photo-copy of the textual reference of ingredients used in the
       formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st Schedule;

           (ii) Conduct safety studies in case the product contains of any of the
           ingredients as specified in the Schedule E(l), as per the guidelines for
           evaluation of Ayurveda Siddha and Unani Drugs formulations;

           (iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not
           required.

 IV. For issue of license with respect to Saundarya Prasadak (Husane afza/
 Azhagu Sodhan) the person who applied for license is required to:—

           (i) Submit photo-copy of the textual reference of ingredients used in the
           formulation as mentioned in the book of 1st Schedule;

           (ii) Conduct safety studies, in case the formulation contains of any of
           the ingredients as specified in the Schedule E(l), as per the guidelines for
           evaluation of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani formulation;


 Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India               Page 179 of 859
              (iii) For textual indications the safety and effectiveness study is not
              required.

 V. For issue of license with respect to medicine Aushadh Ghana [extract of
 medicinal plant (dry or wet).

 Serial                                    Ingredient Indication                  Safety              Experience / Evidence of
                    Category
number                                        (S)         (s)                     study                    Effectiveness
  (1)                   (2)                     (3)              (4)                (5)                         (6)
                                                                                                 Published        Proof of
                                                                                                 Literature     Effectiveness
                                              As per                              Not               Not             Not
  1.      (A)Aqueous                                       As per text
                                               text                             Required          Required        Required
                                              As per           New                Not               Not
  2.      (Al) Aqueous                                                                                            Required
                                               text         indication          Required          Required
                                              As per                              Not                If             Not
  3.      (B) Hydro-Alcohol                                As per text
                                               text                             Required          Required        Required
                                               As         New                                        If
  4.      (Bl) Hydro-Alcohol                                                    Required                          Required
                                            specified Indication**                                Required
                                                                              Required
                                                                               Acute,
          Other than                           As               As            Chronic,      If
  5.                                                                                                              Required
          Hydro/Hydro-Alcohol               specified        specified      Mutagenicity Required
                                                                                 and
                                                                            Teratogenicity


 * The standard protocol will also include concept of Anupan, Prakriti
 & Tridosh, etc., published by Central Research Councils Ayurveda, Siddha,
 Unani and other Government/Research Bodies.

 ** New indication means which is other than mentioned in 1st Schedule books
 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.]
        730
        [158C. Form of Free Sale Certificate and Non-Conviction
 Certificate.—The State Drug Controller or Licensing Authority shall, on
 request by the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs manufacturer, issue, within
 fifteen days ;from the date of application. Free Sale Certificate in Form 26 E2-I
 for original License holder or in Form 26 E2-II for loan licensee and Non-
 Conviction Certificate for both original and loan license holder in Form 26 E3
 or in the format as specified by the importing country or tenderer respectively,


 Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India               Page 180 of 859
after fulfillment of all requisite formalities as required in the respective
formats.]
      731
       [Explanation.—For the purposes of this rule, the applicant shall apply
online and licensing authority shall issue such certificate online through portal
e-AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) as per the format provided in the said
portal.]

    159. Cancellation and suspension of licences.—(1) The licensing authority
may, after giving the licensee an opportunity to show cause, within a period
which shall not be less than fifteen days form the date of receipt of such notice,
why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the
reasons therefor, cancel a licence issued under this Part or suspend it for such
period as he thinks fit, either wholly or in respect of some of the drugs to which
it relates, if in his opinion, the licensee has failed to comply with any of the
conditions of the licence or with any provisions of the Act or the rules made
thereunder.

    (2) A licensee whose licence has been suspended or cancelled may appeal to
the State Government within a period of three months from the date of receipt
of the order which shall, after considering the appeal, decide the same.

   160. Identification of raw materials.—Raw materials used in the
preparation of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs shall be identified
and tested, wherever tests are available for their genuineness, and records of
such tests as are carried out for the purpose and the methods thereof shall be
maintained.]
                                                   206
                                                       [PART XVI (A)

  APPROVAL OF INSTITUTIONS FOR CARRYING OUT TESTS ON
 AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS AND RAW MATERIALS
 USED IN THEIR MANUFACTURE ON BEHALF OF LICENSEES FOR
 MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI
                        DRUGS

   160A. Application for grant of approval for testing Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani drugs.—Application for grant or renewal of approval for carrying
out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 181 of 859
Unani drugs or the raw materials used in the manufacture thereof on behalf of
licensees for manufacture for sale of the said Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani
drugs, shall be made in Form 47 to the Licensing Authority appointed by the
State Government for the purposes of Part XVI, XVII or XVIII of these rules, as
the case may be, and referred to as the "approving authority" under this Part and
shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of six thousand rupees in respect of
the drugs specified in First Schedule to the Act:

   Provided that the applicant shall furnish to the approving authority such
additional information as may be required by it in connection with the
application in Form 47:

    Provided further that if the applicant applies for renewal of approval after its
expiry but within six months of such expiry, the inspection fee payable shall be
six thousand rupees plus an additional inspection fee at the rate of one thousand
rupees per month in the case of testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs
specified in First Schedule to the Act.

   Explanation.—For the purpose of this Part, the words "Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani drags" shall also mean and include the raw materials used in the
manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be.

    160B. Form in which approval to be granted for carrying out tests on
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs on behalf of licensees for manufacture
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs and conditions for grant or renewal
of such approval.—(1) Approval for carrying out such tests of identity, purity,
quality and strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as may be required
under the provisions of these rules, on behalf of licensee for manufacture of
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs shall be granted in Form 48.
      207
      [(1A) The licence shall be issued within a period of two months, from the
date of receipt of the application or from the date of fulfillment of shortcomings,
if any, as the case may be, communicated by the licensing authority.]

   (2) Before approval in Form 48 is granted or renewed, the following
conditions shall be complied with by the applicants, namely:—

            (i) The premises where the tests are carried out shall be well lighted and
            properly ventilated except where the nature of tests of any Ayurvedic,


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 182 of 859
            Siddha and Unani drug warrants otherwise. Wherever necessary, the
            premises shall be air-conditioned so as to maintain the accuracy and
            functioning of laboratory instruments or to enable the performance of
            special tests such as sterility tests and microbiological tests.

            (ii) (a) The applicant shall provide adequate space having regard to the
                 nature and number of samples of drugs proposed to be tested:
                 Provided that the approving authority shall determine from time to
                 time whether the space provided continues to be adequate. Provided
                 further that separate section shall be provided for (i) Chemistry, (ii)
                 Pharmacognosy, (iii) Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani, (iv)
                 Microbiology, (v) Sample Room, (vi) Office-cum-Record Room,
                 with proper partitions and minimum required area is 800 sq. ft.
                  208
                     *(b) The applicant shall provide a list of persons who may be
                  employed with him as experts, such as Chemist, Botanist and expert
                  in Avurveda/Siddha/Unani or Pharmacist who shall possess a degree
                  in Chemistry, Botany, Ayurveda/Siddha/ Unani/Bachelor in
                  Pharmacy from a recognized University or equivalent, with
                  experience for 2 years for carrying out tests or analysis as per the
                  Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani pharmacopoeias.

                  (c) The applicant shall provide adequate equipments essential for
                  carrying out tests for identity, purity, quality and strength of
                  Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs as per pharmacopoeial standards
                  or other available standards.

                           List of equipment recommended is given below:

CHEMISTRY SECTION

1.     Alcohol determination apparatus complete set.
2.     Volatile oil determination apparatus.
3.     Boiling point determination apparatus.
4.     Melting point determination apparatus.
5.     Refractometer
6.     Polarimeter.
7.     Viscometer (ostwalds, Redwood viscometer).
8.     Tablet disintegration apparatus.

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 183 of 859
9. Moisture determination apparatus (IC filtrator).
10. U.V. Spectro-Photometer.
11. Muffle furnace.
12. Electronic Balance.
13. Hot air oven(s) different range of temperature/vacuum oven.
14. Refrigerator.
15. Glass distillation apparatus/plant.
16. Water supply demineralised exchange equipment/Distillation equipment.
17. Air conditioner.
18. LPG Gas Cylinder with burners.
19. Water bath (temperature controlled).
20. Heating mantle (4) or as required.
21. TLC apparatus with all accessories.
22. Sieves 10 to 120 with sieve shaker.
23. Centrifuge machine.
24. Dehumidifier (where necessary).
25. PH meter.
26. G.L.C. with F.I. detector.
27. Silica crucible.
28. Tablet friability tester.
29. Tablet dissolution tester.
30. Other related equipment, regents, chemicals and glasswares.

PHARMACOGNOSY SECTION

1. Microscope binocular.
2. Dissecting Microscope
3. Microtome
4. Chemical balance
5. Microslide cabinet.
6. Aluminium slide trays.
7. Hot air oven
8. Occular Micrometer
9. Stage Micrometer
10. Camera Lucida Prism type and mirror type.
11. Hot plates.
12. Refrigerator.
13. LPG Cylinder with burners.


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 184 of 859
14. Other related equipments, reagents, glasswares, etc.

   Note.—Instruments     like    HPLC,      HPTLC,       Atomic      Absorption
spectrophotometer could be arranged by tie up with other laboratories.

MICROBIOLOGY SECTION

     1.     Laminar air flow bench (L.A.F.).
     2.     B.O.D. Incubator.
     3.     Plain incubator.
     4.     Serological water bath.
     5.     Oven.
     6.     Autoclave/Sterilizer.
     7.     Microscope (high power).
     8.     Colony counter.
     9.     Other related equipment and reagents.

   (3) The applicant shall provide and maintain suitable equipment having
regard to the nature and number of samples of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani
drugs intended to be tested which shall be adequate in the opinion of the
approving authority.

    (4) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be,
for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out under the active
direction of one of the experts stated in clause (b) of sub-rule (2) who shall be
the person-in-charge of testing and shall be held responsible for the reports of
test issued by the applicant.

   (5) The testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be,
for identity, purity, quality and strength shall be carried out by persons whose
qualifications and experience of testing are adequate as stated in clause (b) of
sub-rule (2).

   (6) The applicant shall provide books of standard recognized under the
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and such books of reference
as may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the products for
the testing of which approval is applied for.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 185 of 859
   (7) The applicant shall provide list of standard Ayurvedic, Siddha and
Unani drugs (with Reference samples) recognized under the provisions of the
Act and rules made thereunder and such reference samples kept in the
laboratory may be required in connection with the testing or analysis of the
products of which approval is applied for.

   160C. Duration of approval.—An approval granted in Form 41 or renewed
in Form 42 unless sooner suspended or withdrawn, shall be valid for a period of
three years from the date on which it is granted or renewed:

    Provided that if an application for the renewal of an approval in Form 40 is
made before its expiry or if the application is made within six months of its
expiry after the payment of the additional inspection fee, the approval shall
continue to be in force until orders to the contrary are passed on the application
and the approval shall be deemed to have expired if the application for renewal
is not made within six months of expiry.

    160D. Conditions of approval.—An approval in Form 41 shall be subject
to the following conditions, namely:

     I.     The Institution granted approval under this Part (hereinafter referred to
            as the approved laboratory) shall provide and maintain adequate staff
            and adequate premises and equipment as specified in rule 160 B.

     II.     The approved laboratory shall provide proper facilities for storage so as
            to preserve the properties of the samples to be tested by it.

     III.     The approved laboratory shall maintain records of tests for identity,
            purity, quality and strength carried out on all samples of Ayurvedic,
            Siddha and Unani drugs and the results thereof together with the
            protocols of tests showing the readings and calculation in such form as
            to be available for inspection and such records shall be retained in the
            case of substances for which date of expiry is assigned; for a period of
            two years from such date of expiry and in the case of other substances,
            for a period of three years.

     IV.      The approved laboratory shall allow the Inspector appointed under this
            Act to enter with or without prior notice the premises where the testing
            is carried out and to inspect the premises and the equipment used for test


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 186 of 859
            and the testing procedures employed. The laboratory shall allow the
            Inspectors to inspect the registers and records maintained under these
            rules and shall supply to such Inspectors such information as they may
            require for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of the Act
            and rules made thereunder have been observed.

     V.      The approved laboratory shall from time to time report to the approving
            authority any changes in the person-in-charge of testing of Ayurvedic,
            Siddha and Unani drugs or the expert staff responsible for testing, as the
            case may be, and any material alterations in the premises or changes in
            the equipment used for the purposes of testing which have been made
            since the date of last inspection made on behalf of the approving
            authority before the grant or renewal of approval.

     VI.     The approved laboratory shall furnish reports of the results of tests or
            analysis in Form 50.

     VII.      In case any sample of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug is found on
            test to be not of standard quality, the approved laboratory shall furnish to
            the approving authority and the licensing authority of the State where
            the manufacturer and/or sender of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani
            drugs is located, a copy of the test report on the sample with the
            protocols of tests applied.

     VIII. The approved laboratory shall comply with the provisions of the Act
         and rules made thereunder and with such further requirements, if any, as
         may be specified in the rules made from time to time under Chapter IVA
         of the Act of which the approving authority has given the approved
         laboratory not less than four months' notice.

     IX. The approved laboratory shall maintain an inspection book to enable the
         Inspector to record his impression or defects notices.

    160E. Inspection before grant of approval.—Before an approval in Form
48 is granted, the approving authority shall cause the laboratory at which the
testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs, as the case may be, is proposed
to be carried out to be inspected jointly by the Inspectors appointed or
designated by the Central Government and State Government for this purpose,
who shall examine the premises and the equipment intended to be used for


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 187 of 859
testing of drugs and varify into the professional qualifications of the expert staff
who are or may be employed by the laboratory.

   160F. Report of inspection.—The Inspectors appointed by the Central
Government as stated in rule 160E shall forward to the approving authority a
detailed report of the results of the inspection.

    160G. Procedure of approving authority.—(1) If the approving authority
after such further enquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, is satisfied that
the requirements of the rules made under the Act have been complied with and
that the conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been
observed, it shall grant approval in Form 48.

   (2) If the approving authority is not so satisfied, it shall reject the application
and shall inform the applicant of the reasons for such rejection and of the
conditions which shall be satisfied before approval could be granted.

   160H. Application after rejection.—If within a period of six months from
the rejection of an application for approval, the applicant informs the approving
authority that the conditions laid down have been satisfied and deposits
inspection fee of two thousand rupees, the approving authority may, if, after
causing a further inspection to be made and after being satisfied that the
conditions for grant of approval have been complied with, grant the approval in
Form 48.

   160-I. Renewal—On an application being made for renewal, the approving
authority shall, after causing an inspection to be made and if satisfied that the
conditions of the approval and the rules made under the Act have been complied
with, shall issue a certificate of renewal in Form 49.

    160J. Withdrawal and suspension of approvals.—(1) The approving
authority may, after giving the approved laboratory an opportunity to show
cause why such an order should not be passed, by an order in writing stating the
reasons therefor, withdraw an approval granted under this Part or suspend it for
such period as it thinks fit either wholly or in respect of testing of some of the
categories of Avurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs to which it relates, if in his
opinion the approved laboratory had failed to comply with any of the conditions
of the approval or with any provision of the Act of the rules made thereunder.



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 188 of 859
   (2) any approved laboratory, whose approval has been suspended or
withdrawn, may, within three months of the date of the order of suspension or
withdrawal, appeal to the State Government which shall dispose of the appeal in
consultation with a panel of competent persons appointed by the Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Government of India in this
behalf and notified in the Official Gazette.]
    732
      [160K. Information to be uploaded by the licencee on online portal.—
(1) The applicant or licencee under this part shall register with portal, e-
AUSHADHI (www.e-aushadhi.gov.in) and upload information, as per the
format provided in the said portal, pertaining to licence application, renewal,
tests carried out and other such information as required and shall be updated
from time to time.

   (2) The information uploaded by the licencee in the portal under sub-rule (1)
shall be verified by the concerned licensing authority.]
                                                     733
                               [PART XVII
           734
              [LABELLING, PACKING AND LIMIT OF ALCOHOL IN]
             AYURVEDIC (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS

    161. 734[Labelling, packing and limit of alcohol].—(1) There shall be
conspicuously displayed on the label of the container or package of an
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drug, the true list of all the ingredients
735
   [with the botanical names of plant based ingredients along with plant part(s)
and form of ingredients, in which, these are] used in the manufacture of the
preparation together with the quantity of each of the ingredients incorporated
therein and a reference to the method of preparation thereof as detailed in the
standard text and Adikarana, as are prescribed in the authoritative books
specified in the First Schedule of the Act 735[and in respect of Patent or
Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani drugs, the true list of all the ingredients
with the botanical names of plant based ingredients along with plant part(s) and
form of ingredients, in which, these are used in the formulation, with their
quantity:

   Provided that if needed, standardized abbreviations prescribed for part(s) and
form of Ingredient(s) in the official Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani
Pharmacopoeias and Formularies, may be used on the label:]



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 189 of 859
   Provided that if the list of ingredients contained in the medicine is large and
cannot be accommodated on the label, the same may be printed separately and
enclosed with the packing and reference be made to this effect on the label.

   (2) The container of a medicine for internal use made up ready for the
treatment of human ailments shall, if it is made up from a substance specified in
Schedule E(l), be labelled conspicuously with the words 'Caution: to be taken
under medical supervision' both English and Hindi languages.

   (3) Subject to the other provisions of these rules, the following particulars
shall be either printed or written in indelible ink and shall appear in a
conspicuous manner on the label of the innermost container of any Ayurvedic
(including Siddha) or Unani drug 735[and Patent or Proprietary Ayurveda,
Siddha or Unani drugs] and on any other covering in which the container is
packed, namely:—

         (i)      The name of the drug. 736[For Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Drug]
                  purpose the name shall be the same as mentioned in the authoritative
                  books included in the First Schedule of the Act.

         (ii)     A correct statement of the net content in terms of weight, measure or
                  number as the case may be. The weight and volume shall be
                  expressed in metric system.

         (iii) The name and address of the manufacturer.

         (iv) The number of the licence under which the drug is manufactured, the
              figure representing the manufacturing licence number being preceded
              by the words 'Manufacturing Licence Number' or "Mfg. Lie. No." or
              "M.L.".

          (v)      A distinctive batch number, that is to say, the number by reference
                  to which details of manufacture of the particular batch from which
                  the substance in the container is taken are recorded and are available
                  for inspection, the figure representing the batch number being
                  preceded by the words "Batch No." or "Batch" or "Lot Number" or
                  "Lot No." or "Lot" or any distinguishing prefix.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 190 of 859
         (vi)      The date of manufacture. For this purpose the date of manufacture
                  shall be the date of completion of the final products, or the date of
                  bottling or packing for issue.

         (vii)     The words "Ayurvedic medicine" or "Siddha medicine" or "Unani
                  medicine" as the case may be.

         (viii)     The words "FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY" if the medicine is for
                  external application.

         (ix) Every drug intended for distribution to the medical profession as a
              free sample shall, while complying with the labelling provisions
              under clause (i) or (viii), further bear on the label of the container the
              words "Physician's sample. Not to be sold" which shall be
              overprinted.
         737
               [(x) (a) Preparation (Asavas) with high content of alcohol as base.

Name of the drug                                     Maximum size of packing

(i) Kapur Asava                                      15 ml.
(ii) Ahiphenasava                                    15 ml.
(iii) Margamadasava                                  15 ml.
(b) Preparation containing self-generated alcohol.
                                                     Maximum content               of    alcohol
Name of the drug                                                                                     Maximum size of packing
                                                     (Ethylalcohol v/v)
(i) Mritsanjivani Sura                               16 per cent                                     30 ml.
(ii) Mahadrakshava                                   16 per cent                                     120 ml.]


     (4) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to require the labelling of airy
transparent cover or of any wrapper-case or other covering used solely for the
purpose of packing, transport in delivery.]
       738
       [161A. Exemption in labelling and packing provisions for export of
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) and Unani Drugs.—(1) Label and packages or
containers of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs for export may be adapted to
meet the specific requirements of the law of the country to which the said drugs
is to be exported, but the following particulars shall appear in conspicuous




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India              Page 191 of 859
position on the container in which drug is packed and on every other covering in
which that container is packed, namely:—

         (a)      name of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug (single or compound
                  formulation);

         (b)      the name, address of the manufacturer and the number of licence
                  under which the drug has been manufactured;

         (c) batch or lot number;

         (d) date of manufacture, along with date for "Best for use before".

         (e)      main ingredients, if required by the importing country;

         (f) for EXPORT:

    Provided that where Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani single or compound drug
not classified under the First Schedule or Schedule E(l), is required by the
consignee to be not labelled with the name and address of the manufacturer, the
labels on packages or containers shall bear a code number as approved by the
licensing authority mentioned in rule 152.

    (2) The provisions of rule 161 shall not apply to a medicine made up “ready
for treatment” whether after, or without, alteration, which is supplied on the
prescription of a registered medical practitioner, if the medicine is labelled with
the following particulars, namely:—

         (a) the name and address of the suppliers;

         (b) the words "For External Use Only", if the medicine is for external
              application.]
      739
      [161B. Shelf life or date of expiry of medicines.—(1) The date of expiry
of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani medicines shall be conspicuously displayed on
the label of container or package of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani medicine, as
the case may be, and after the said date of expiry, no medicine shall be
marketed, sold, distributed or consumable;




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 192 of 859
   Provided that this rule shall apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines
seeking licence or renewal of licence for manufacturing after the date of
notification of the rules.

   Provided also that this rule shall not be applicable to the Ayurvedic, Siddha
or Unani medicines manufactured and marketed prior to the date of this
notification.

    (2) Every person applying for licence or renewal of licence for the
manufacturing of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani medicines defined under clause
(h) of section 3 of the Act shall submit to the State Licensing Authority
scientific data based shelf life or date of expiry of the medicine based on the
Real time stability studies of medicines in accordance with the guidelines
prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India.

   Provided that this sub-rule shall be applicable after three years from the date
of notification of the rules.

    (3) The guidelines regarding stability studies as prescribed in the
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Volume-VIII shall be applicable to
all the medicines of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani.

   (4) The State Licensing Authority shall, before granting license or renewal
of license for an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani medicine, ensure validity of the
data submitted by the manufacturer in support of the claimed shelf-life of that
medicine.

   (5) The State Licensing Authority may at any time direct the manufacturer
to provide the samples of the medicine and any other related information; and
may share it with the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine,
Ghaziabad for analysis or independent validation.

    (6) Where the manufacturer fails to comply with direction of the State
licensing Authority under sub-rule (5), the license for the manufacturing of the
medicine shall be liable for suspension after giving a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.

  (7) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the State Licensing
Authority under sub-rule (6), may within sixty days of such order, appeal to the


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 193 of 859
Central Government, and the Central Government may, after such enquiry into
the matter as is considered necessary, pass such order in relation thereto as it
deems fit. The decision of the Central Government shall be final and binding.

   (8) The shelf life or date of expiry of an Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani
medicine defined under clause (a) of section 3 of the Act shall, unless otherwise
determined on the basis of scientific data, be as follows:—


                                               (Ayurvedic medicines)
                                                                                                  Shelf life or date of
 SI.
            Dosage form                                                                         expiry with effect from
 No.
                                                                                                the date of manufacture
   (1)                                            (2)                                                     (3)
 (i)        Anjana
            (a) Anjana made from Kasthaushadhi                                                          1 year
            (b) Anjana made from Kasthaushadhi along with
                                                                                                        2 years
            Rasa/ Uprasa / Bhasma
            (c) Anjana made only from Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma                                                3 years
 (ii)       Arka                                                                                        1 year
 (iii)      Asava Arista                                                                               10 years
 (iv)       Avaleha, Khanda, Paka, Guda                                                                 3 years
            Chuma, Kwatha Chuma, Lepa Chuma, Danta
 (v)                                                                                                    2 years
            Manjan (Chuma)
 (vi)       Dhoopan                                                                                     2 years
 (vii)      Dravaka, Lavana, Kshara                                                                     5 years
 (viii) Ghrita                                                                                          2 years
 (ix)       Guggulu                                                                                     5 years
 (x)        Gutika/Vati
            (I) Gutika or Vati containing Kasthaushadhi along
            with Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma/Guggulu (including Lepa                                             5 years
            Gutika and GhanVati)
            (II) Gutika or Vati containing only Kasthaushadhi
                                                                                                        3 years
            (including Lepa Gutika and Ghan Vati)
            (III)            Gutika/Vati                   containing                 only             10 years



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India              Page 194 of 859
            Ras/Uprasa/Bhasma except Naga, Vanga and Tamra
            Bhasma
 (xi)       Kama /Nasabindu                                                                           2 years
 (xii)      Kupipakva Rasayana                                                                        10 years
 (xiii) Malahar                                                                                       3 years
 (xiv) Mandura-Lauha                                                                                  10 years
 (xv)       Naga Bhasma, Vanga Bhasma and Tamra Bhasma                                                5 years
 (xvi) Netrabindu                                                                                      1 year
 (xvii) Parpati                                                                                       10 years
            Pishti and Bhasma except Naga, Vanga and Tamra
 (xviii)                                                                                              10 years
            Bhasma
 (xix) Pravahi Kwatha                                                                                 3 years

  (1)                                             (2)                                                    (3)
           Rasayoga
           (I) Rasayoga Containing only Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma
                                                                                                      10 years
(xx)       except Naga, Vanga and Tamra Bhasma
           (II) Rasayoga Containing Rasa/Uprasa/Bhasma along
                                                                                                       5 years
           with Kasthaushadhi/Guggulu
(xxi) Sattva (derived from medicinal plant)                                                            2 years
(xxii) Sharkar/Panak / Sharbat                                                                         3 years
(xxiii) Shveta parpati                                                                                 2 years
(xxiv) Taila                                                                                           3 years
(xxv) Varti                                                                                            2 years
                                                   (Siddha medicines)
                                                                                                     Shelf life or date
                                                                                                      of expiry with
 SI.
                                             Dosage form                                              effect from the
 No.
                                                                                                          date of
                                                                                                       manufacture
 (1)                                                 (2)                                                    (3)
 (i) Curanam
         Kutinir Curanam/Adai Curanam/Kanchi Curanam/Utkali
                                                                                                          2 years
         Curanam/Pittu Curanam/Podithimirthal Curanam/Podi/



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India          Page 195 of 859
        Pattru Curanam/Pottanam or Kizhi Curanam/Ottratam
        Curanam/Vethu        Curanam/Pugai   Curanam/Kah
        Curanam/Thuvalai Curanam
 (ii) Mattirai/V atakam
        (I) Containing only Moohgai ingredients (including
        Kudineer Curanam Mattirai) (e.g. Nilavembu kutinir                                           2 years
        Mattirai)
        (II) Containing Mooligai ingredients along with Thathu
        Porutkal/Jeeva          Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/Cunnam.                                     5 years
        (including kutinir Curanam Mattirai)
        (m) Containing only Thathu Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/
                                                                                                     10 years
        Cimnam/Kattu/Kalanku.
 (iii) Rasa-Paadana Marunthugal (All Mercurial Preparation)
        (I) Containing Mooligai ingredients along with Thathu
                                                                                                     2 years
        Porutkal/Parpan/Centuram/Cunnam/ Kattu/Kalanku
        (II)   Containing  only    Thathu                                   Porutkal/Parpam/
                                                                                                     10 years
        Centuram/Cunnam Kattu/Kalanku
 (iv) Parpam/Centuram
        (I) Containing only Mooligai ingredients (e.g. Kungiliya
                                                                                                     2 years
        Parpam)

  (1)                                                 (2)                                              (3)
          (II) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Thathu
          Porutkal/Parpam/Centuram/Cunnam/Kattu / Kalanku (e.g.,                                     10 years
          Aya Centuram)
          (HI) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Jeeva Porutkal
                                                                                                     10 years
          (e.g., Sangu Parpam)
 (v)      Karuppu
          (I) Containing only Mooligai ingredients (e.g., Vasambu
                                                                                                     2 years
          Sutta Kari)
          (II) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Thathu
                                                                                                     5 years
          Porutkal (e.g., Sivanar Amirtham, Thalaga Karuppu)
          (III) Containing Mooligai ingredients with Jeeva Porutkal
                                                                                                     5 years
          (e.g., Kasthuri Karuppu, Pattu Karuppu)
 (vi) Patankam
          (I) Mooligai based Patankam (e.g., Sambirani Patankam)                                     5 years


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India     Page 196 of 859
          (II) Rasa based Patankam (eg., Rasa Centuram)                                              10 years
 (vii) Kulampu
          Based on process—
          (I) Araippu Kulampu (e.g., Agathiyar Kulampu)                                              5 years
          (II) Erippu Kulampu (e.g., Kumatti Kulampu)                                                3 years
 (viii) Meluku
          Based on process—
          (I) Araippu Meluku (e.g., Linga Meluku)                                                    5 years
          Based on Process—
          (II) Idippu Meluku (e.g., Rasa Gandhi Meluku/Idi Vallthi
                                                                                                     3 years
          Meluku)
          Based on raw materials-
          (III) Mooligai Meluku (e.g., Malaikudara Meluku)                                           3 years
 (ix) Karpam
          Based on raw materials—
          (I) Mooligai Karpam (e.g., Karisalai Karpam, Thiripala
                                                                                                     2 years
          Karpam)
          Based on raw materials—
          (II) Mooligai Thathu Karpam (e.g., Aya Bringaraja
                                                                                                     5 years
          Karpam)
          Based on process-
          (III) Araippu Karpam (e.g., Irunelli Karpam)                                               3 years
 (x)      Satthu
          (I) Satthu derived from Mooligai (e.g., Seenthil Satthu)                                   2 years
          (II) Satthu derived from Thathu Porutkal (e.g., Aya Satthu,
                                                                                                     10 years
          Eya Satthu,Thurusu Satthu)
   (1)                                                 (2)                                             (3)
           (III) Satthu derived from Jeeva Porutkal (e.g., Sembu
                                                                                                     5 years
           Satthu derived from Poonagam, Mayiliragu)
(xi)       Ilakam/Legiyam/Iracayanaam                                                                3 years
(xii)      Kallikkam/Mai/Kalimbu/Neer/Venney                                                          1 year
(xiii)     Karam (Karanool)                                                                          2 years
(xiv)      Kattu (Medicated bandage cloth)/See!ai/Varthy/Thiri                                        1 year


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India     Page 197 of 859
(xv)       Kattu/Kalanku/Cunnam                                                                              10 years
(xvi)      Kutinir/Kiyazham (with preservatives)                                                             3 years
(xvii) Manappaku/Panagam                                                                                     3 years
(viii)     Nasiyathuli/Kanthuli/Sevithuli                                                                     1 year
(xix)      Ney/Ghirutham/Kadugu                                                                              2 years
(XX) Oothal./Nasigaparanam/Thoopasarakku                                                                      1 year
(xxi)      Pakkuvam, Thennoral                                                                                1 year
(xxii) Panda Vaippu                                                                                          10 years
(xxiii) Peechu                                                                                               2 years
(xxiv) Sutigai                                                                                               2 years
(xxv) Tailam/Ennai/Poochu                                                                                    3 years
(xxvi) Tinir                                                                                                  1 year
(xxvii) Tiravakam (derived from Thathu Porutkal )                                                            2 years
                                                    (Unani medicines)
                                                                                         Shelf life or date of expiry
 SI.
                                      Dosage form                                        with effect from the date of
 No.
                                                                                                 manufacture
  (1)                                        (2)                                                       (3)
 (i)      Arq (except Arq-e-Ajeeb)                                                                   1 year
 (ii)     Arq-e-Ajeeb                                                                                5 years
 (iii) Ayarij / Sunoon/Zuroor/Ghazah                                                                 2 years
 (iv) Burood                                                                                         1 year
 (v)      Shiyaf                                                                                     2 years
 (vi) Surma/Kohal                                                                                    3 years
 (vii) Habb                                                                                          3 years
 (viii) Halwa                                                                                        3 years
 (ix) Itrifai                                                                                        3 years
 (x)      lauhar/Jawahir                                                                             5 years
 (xi) Jawarish                                                                                       4 years
 (xii) Khamira                                                                                       3 years

  (1)                                         (2)                                                      (3)
(xiii) Kushta                                                                                        10 years


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India             Page 198 of 859
(xiv) Laboob                                                                                         3 years
(xv)       Laooq                                                                                     3 years
(xvi) Majoon/Dawa                                                                                    3 years
(xvii) Marham/Zimad/Qairooti                                                                         2 years
(xviii) Mufarreh                                                                                     3 years
(xix) Murabba                                                                                         1 year
(xx)       Nabeez                                                                                    10 years
(xxi) Qurs                                                                                           3 years
(xxii) Qutoor                                                                                         1 year
(xxiii) Raughaniyat/Tila                                                                             3 years
(xxiv) Sharbat,/ Sikajabeen                                                                          3 years
           (I) Sufoof (Without Salt)                                                                 2 years
(xxv)
           (II) Sufoof (Containing salt)                                                              1 year
(xxvi) Tiryaq                                                                                        3 years.]

                                                     740
                       [PART XVIII
   GOVERNMENT ANALYSTS AND INSPECTORS FOR AYURVEDIC
          (INCLUDING SIDDHA) OR UNANI DRUGS

162. Duties of inspectors specially authorised to inspect the manufacture of
Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs.—Subject to the instructions of
the controlling authority, it shall be the duty of an Inspector authorised to
inspect the manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs—

           (i)       to inspect not less than twice a year, all premises licensed for
                    manufacture of Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani drugs within
                    the area allotted to him and to satisfy himself that the conditions of
                    the licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made
                    thereunder are being observed;

           (ii)      to send forthwith to the controlling authority after each inspection a
                    detailed report indicating whether or not the conditions of the
                    licence and the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder
                    are being observed;




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India             Page 199 of 859
           (iii)     to take samples of the drugs manufactured on the premises and
                    send them for test or analysis in accordance with these rules;

           (iv)      to institute prosecution in respect of violation of the Act and the
                    rules made thereunder.
     741
      [162A. Qualifications for State Drug Licensing Authority for licensing
of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs.—(a) The Ayurvedic/Siddha/Unani
qualifications as per Schedule II of CCIM Act 1970/B. Pharma (Ayurveda) of a
recognized University.

   (b) At least 5 years' experience in the Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani drug
manufacturing or testing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs or enforcement
of provisions of Chapter IVA of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and rules
made thereunder or teaching/ research on clinical practice of
Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani System.]

   163. Procedure for despatch of sample to Government Analyst and its
receipt by the Government Analyst.—(1) Sample for test or analysis shall be
sent to the Government Analyst by registered post or by hand in a sealed
package enclosed together with a memorandum in Form 18A in an outer cover
addressed to the Government Analyst.

   (2) The package as well as the outer cover shall be marked with
distinguishing number.

   (3) A copy of the memorandum and a specimen impression of the seal used
to seal the package shall be sent by registered post or by hand to the
Government Analyst.

   (4) On receipt of the package from an Inspector, the Government Analyst
or an Officer authorised by him writing in this behalf shall open the package
and shall also record the conditions of the seals on the package.

   (5) After the test or analysis has been completed, one copy of the results of
the test or analysis shall be supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 13A. A
copy of the result in Form 13A shall be sent simultaneously to the controlling
authority and to the Drugs Controller, India.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 200 of 859
 742
  [PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND
   HOMOEOPATHY AND CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY OF
   INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY TO FUNCTION AS
CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY FOR THE PURPOSE OF TESTING
      OR ANALYSIS OF AYURVEDA, SIDDHA, UNANI AND
                 HOMOEOPATHY DRUGS

   163A. Functions.—Pharmacopoeia Commission of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy at Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh) under the Central Government shall
function to develop and amend standards of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and
Homoeopathy drugs and publish pharmacopoeial monographs, formularies and
standardize procedures with the approval of the Central Government laboratory
of the Pharmacopoeia Commission shall be the Central Drugs Laboratory for
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy for the purpose of testing or analysis of
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs.

   163AA.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute
Scientific Advisory Board for the Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy for a term of three years, to advise the Central
Government, the State Governments and the stakeholders on the matters of
standards, standard operating procedures and testing protocols of Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs.

   (2) The Scientific Advisory Board shall consist of the following members,
namely:—

               (i) Retired Scientific Expert of drugs to be nominated as Chairman
               by the Central Government;

               (ii) Director, Pharmacopoiea Commission for Indian Medicine and
               Homoeopathy; ex officio Member Secretary;

               (iii) Advisor dealing with drugs, Ministry of AYUSH, ex officio-,

               (iv) Drugs Controler General, India, ex officio;

               (v) Scientific Director, Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, ex
               officio;


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 201 of 859
               (vi) Director General, Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic
               Sciences, ex officio;

               (vii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Unani
               Medicine, ex officio;

               (viii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha, ex
               officio;

               (ix) Director General, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy,
               ex officio;

               (x) Central Government Analyst for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and
               Homoeopathy, Drugs, ex officio;

               (xi) One professionally experienced expert each of standardization or
               quality control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homoeopathy drugs,
               pharmacognosy or botany, chemistry, Phyto-chemistry and pharmacy
               to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the
               scientific institutions.

               (xii) Chairman shall have the discretion to co-opt two experts for
               advice and guidance in specific matters of standards of Ayurvedic,
               Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs.

   (3) The functions of Scientific Advisory Board may be exercised
notwithstanding any vacancy therein.

   (4) The Commission shall constitute a pharmacopoeia committee and sub-
committees there under for a period of three years on the recommendation of
Scientific Advisory Board.

   (5) The meetings of Scientific Advisory Board, Pharmacopoeia Committee
and Subcommittees shall be supported by the Commission.]
     743
      [163B. The functions of the Central Drug Laboratory in respect of
Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs shall be carried out at the
Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Ghaziabad, (Uttar Pradesh) and the functions of the Director in respect of the
said drugs shall be exercised by the Director of the said laboratory.


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 202 of 859
   163BB. (1) The laboratory of Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy shall act as the Central Appellate Drugs Laboratory
under section 6 of the Act for testing or analysis of samples of Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs as may be sent to it under sub-
section(2) of section 11 or sub-section(4) of section 25 and 33H of the said Act.

    (2) The Central Drugs Laboratory shall maintain reference museum and
herbarium of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs, conduct
training programmes for analytical and drugs quality control methods and carry
out such activities and duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central
Government.

   (3) All functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory for Ayurvedic, Siddha,
Unani and Homoeopathy drugs shall be exercised by the Director or the officer
appointed on his behalf of the Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine
and Homoeopathy.]

    163C. Despatch of samples for test or analysis.—(1) Samples for testing or
analysis of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs under sub-section (2) of section
11 or sub-section (1) of section 25 and section 33H of the Act shall be sent by
registered post in a sealed packet, enclosed with a memorandum in Form 1A,
744
   [Form 18 or Form 18-A] specified in Schedule A, in an outer cover addressed
to the Director, 745[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)].

   (2) The packet as well as the outer cover, shall be marked with a
distinguishing number.

   (3) A copy of the memorandum in Form 1A and a specimen impression of
the seal used to seal the packet shall be sent separately by registered post to the
Director, 746[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)].

    163D. Recording of condition of seals.—On receipt of the packet, it shall
be opened by an officer authorised in writing on that behalf by the Director,
746
   [Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)], who shall record the condition of the seal on the
packet.



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 203 of 859
   163E. Report of result of test or analysis.—After test or analysis, the result
of the test or analysis, together with full protocols of the tests applied, shall be
supplied forthwith to the sender in Form 2A 747[or Form 13] of as specified in
the said Schedule.

   163F. Fees.—The fees for test and analysis shall be as specified in Schedule
B-l.

   163G. Signature on certificates.—Certificates issued under these rules by
the 746[Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)] shall be signed by the Director or by an officer
authorised by the Central Government to sign such certificates.]
     748
      [164. Method of test or analysis to be employed in relation to
Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy drugs.—The method of test or
analysis to be employed in relation to an Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or
Homoeopathy drugs shall be such as may be specified in the Ayurvedic, Siddha,
Unani or Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia, or if no such pharmacopoeias are
available or if no test is specified in such pharmacopoeias, such test as the
Government Analyst may employ, such tests being scientifically established to
determine whether the drug contains the ingredients as stated on the label.]

   165. Qualifications of Government Analyst.—A person who is appointed
a Government Analyst under section 33F of the Act shall be a person possessing
the qualifications prescribed in rule 44 or a degree in 749[Ayurveda, Siddha,
Unani or Homoeopathy] system, as the case may be, conferred by a University,
a State Government or Statutory Faculties, Councils 750[Boards of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy Boards] recognised by the Central or
State Government, as the case may be, for this purpose and has had not less than
three years' post-graduate experience in the analysis of drugs in a laboratory
under the control of (i) a Government Analyst appointed under the Act, or (ii) a
Chemical Examiner to Government, or (iii) the head of an institution specially
approved for the purpose by the appointing authority.

   166. Duties of Government Analyst.—(1) The Government Analyst shall
analyse or test or cause to be analysed or tested such samples of 751[Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy] drugs as may be sent to him by Inspectors or
any other person or authority authorised by the Central Government or a State



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 204 of 859
Government under the provisions 752[***] of the Act and shall furnish reports of
the results of test or analysis in accordance with these rules.

   (2) A Government Analyst appointed under section 34F shall from time to
time forward to the Government reports giving the results of analytical work
and research with a view to their publication at the discretion of the
Government.]
     753
     [167. Qualifications of Inspector.—A person who is appointed an
Inspector under section 33 G shall be a person who—

   (a) has the qualifications laid down under rule 49 and shall have undergone
practical training in the manufacture of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or
Homoeopathy drug, as the case may be; or

   (b) has a degree in Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy system or
degree in Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani or Homoeopathy Pharmacy, as the case
may be, conferred by a University or a State Government or a Statutory Faculty,
Council or Board of Indian Systems of Medicine or Board of Homoeopathy
recognized by the Central Government or the State Government for this
purpose.]
                                                       754
                           [PART XIX
        STANDARDS OF AYURVEDIC SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

   168. Standards to be complied with in manufacture for sale or for
distribution of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs.—

S.No              Class of Drugs                               Standards to be complied with
         755                     The standards for identity, purity and
          [Drugs] included in
                                 strength as given in the editions of
1.       Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
                                 Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India for the
                                 time being in force.
                                                          The upper limit of alcohol as self-
                                                          generated alcohol should not exceed 12%
2.       Asavas and Aristas                               v/v excepting those that are otherwise
                                                          notified by the Central Government from
                                                          time to time.]


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 205 of 859
        756
       [169. Permitted Excipients.—Permitted Excipients along with their
standards i.e., additives, preservatives, antioxidants, flavouring agents, chelating
agents, etc., permitted in the Indian Pharmacopoeia (IP), Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954 and Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 are permitted
for use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs with the following conditions,
namely:—

          1.      The above excipients shall be used in the permissible limits as
                  prescribed in the Indian Pharmacopoeia/Prevention of Food
                  Adulteration Act, 1954/Food Product Order/Bureau of Indian
                  Standard Act, 1986 and they shall comply with the respective quality
                  specifications, not exceeding any specified limits of usage therein,
                  and except Hydrogenated vegetable oil.

          2.       Only natural colouring agents as permitted under rule 26 of
                  Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 will be used for
                  Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs and additionally, colours
                  permitted under rule 127 of Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945 shall
                  be used for Proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs as
                  defined in sub-clause (i) of clause (h) of section 3 of the Drugs and
                  Cosmetics Act, 1940, not exceeding any specified limits of usage
                  therein.

          3.      Preservatives and Colouring agents shall be mentioned on the label
                  for the information of the consumer as required under rule 161 of the
                  Drugs and Cosmetics Rule, 1945.

          4.      Additives used in various processes and in formulating dosage forms
                  shall be mentioned clearly with quantities used, in the application for
                  licenses and the record for the same shall be maintained by the
                  manufacturers.

          5.      Manufacturers shall be responsible to ensure rationality, safety and
                  quantity used of various excipients in the formulation.

          6.      If any excipients or additive or preservative etc., referred in Indian
                  Pharmacopoeia/Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954/Food
                  Product Order/Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 is deleted at a



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 206 of 859
                  particular point of time, this will also be deleted simultaneously for
                  the use in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs.

           7.     Following artificial sweeteners as per maximum limit indicated
                  below may be used in various dosage forms of Ayurveda, Siddha,
                  Unani Proprietary Medicines:—

                  Artificial sweeteners may be used only in proprietary ASU products
                  and the label of such products should carry a statutory warning
                  stating the name and quantity of the artificial sweetener used.

    The recommended Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) of these sweeteners as
laid down by US FDA is as follows:
           S.
                       Sucralose                Aspartame                  Saccharin                 Acesulfame K
           No.
           1.
                       5mg/kg                   40 mg/kg                   3 mg/kg                    15 mg/kg
                     body weight               body weight               body weight                 body weight


                  One-third of the above ADI would be permissible for use in
                  Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Patent and Proprietary drugs.

           8. Any previous notification issued by the Department of AYUSH
               regarding use of excipients/additives or preservatives in Ayurveda,
               Siddha and Unani medicines stands superseded.]
     757
      [170. Prohibition of advertisements of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drugs.—
    (1) The manufacturer or his agent, of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs,
shall not participate in the publication of any advertisement relating to any drug
for the use of diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease,
disorder, syndrome or condition.

   (2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be advertised for the
purpose other than specified in sub-rule (1) after the allotment of the Unique
Identification Number.

   (3) The manufacturer of the Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall apply
for the Unique Identification Number for the advertisement issued or aired


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India            Page 207 of 859
before this notification, within the period of three months from the date of the
publication of this notification.

     (4) The application for advertisement shall be rejected if,

              (i) it is incomplete; or

              (ii) the intended advertisement does not contain the contact details of
              the manufacturer; or

              (iii)  the contents of the advertisement directly or indirectly
              tantamount to vulgarity or obscenity; or

              (iv) it refers to any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in terms which
              suggest or calculated to lead to the use of that drug or medicine for the
              enhancement of height and dimensions or capacity of performance of
              male or female sexual organs; or

              (v) it depicts photographs or testimonials of celebrities or government
              officials; or

              (vi) it refers to any Government or Autonomous organization of the
              Government; or

              (vii) it gives a false impression about the true character of Ayurvedic,
              Siddha or Unani drug; or

              (viii) it makes a misleading or exaggerated claim about the
              effectiveness of the said drug.

   (5) The application for allotment of the Unique Identification Number for
an advertisement shall be submitted in Form 26 E-4 to the State Licensing
Authority or Drug Controller specifying therein the claims such as textual
references, rationale from the authoritative books, indication(s) or use(s),
evidence regarding safety, effectiveness and quality of the drug.

   (6) The application fee of rupees one thousand per advertisement shall be
deposited along with Form 26E-4 and other supporting documents.




Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 208 of 859
           Subs, by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010, for clause (1A) (w.e.f. 4-5-2010). Earlier clause (1A)
 719.      was inserted by G.S.R. 198(E), dated 7th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7-3-2003).
 720.      The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 390(E), dated 18 th May, 2015, for sub-rules (1B) and (1C) (w.e.f .18-5-2016). Earlier
 721.      sub-rules (1B) and (1C) was inserted by G.S.R704(E), dated 25 th October, 2013 (w.e.f. 25-10-2013).
 722.      Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub-rule (1D) (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
 723.      Sub-rule (1E) omitted by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
 724.      Ins. by G.S.R. 512(E), dated 9th July, 2008 (w.e.f. 9-7-2008).
 725.      Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub-clause (c) (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). Earlier sub-
 726.      clause (c) was inserted by G.S.R. 331(E) dated 8 th May, 1984 (w.e.f.8-5-1984).
 727.      Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978)
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for sub-clause (e) (w.e.f. 1-10-2021). Earlier sub-
 728.      clause (e) was inserted by G.S.R. 331(E) dated 8 th May, 1984 (w.e.f.8-5-1984).
 729.      Ins. by G.S.R. 663(E), dated 10th August, 2010 (w.e.f. 10-8-2010).
 730.      Ins. by G.S.R. 153(E), dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014).
 731.      Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
 732.      Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021 (w.e.f. 1-10-2021).
 733.      Part XVII (containing rule 161) added by Notification No. F. 1-23/6, dated 2nd Feburary, 1970.
 734.      Subs. by G.S.R. 904(E), dated 2nd November, 1992 (w.e.f. 2-11-1992).
 735.      Ins. by G.S.R. 844(E), dated 26th November, 2012 (w.e.f. 26-11-2013).
 736.      Subs. by G.S.R. 844(E), dated 26th November, 2012 (w.e.f. 26-11-2013).
 737.      Ins. by G.S.R. 904(E), dated 2nd November, 1992 (w.e.f. 2-11-1992).
 738.      Ins. by G.S.R. 787(E), dated 17th October, 2000 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 789(E), dated 12th August, 2016, for rule 161B (w.e.f. 12-8-2016). Earlier rule 161B
 739.      was inserted by G.S.R. 764(E), dated 15th October, 2009 (w.e.f. 15-10-2009).
 740.      Part XVIII (containing rule 162 to 167) added by Notification No. F. 1-23/6, dated 2nd Feburary, 1970.
 741.      Ins. by G.S.R. 76(E), dated 3rd February, 2003 (w.e.f. 3-2-2003).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 163A (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). Earlier rule 163A
 742.      was inserted by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006).
 743.      Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 163B (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 744.      Ins. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian
 745.      Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian
 746.      Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 747.      Ins. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 748.      Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 164 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 749.      Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “and Boards of Indian Systems of Medicine”
 750.      (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Ayurvedic (including Siddha) or Unani” (w.e.f.
 751.      23-3-2021).
 752.      The words “of Chapter VIA” omitted by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for rule 167 (w.e.f. 23-3-2021). Earlier rule 167 was
 753.      sub. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978)
 754.      Part XIX (containing rule 168) inserted by G.S.R. 519(E), dated 26 th June, 1995 (w.e.f. 26-6-1995).
 755.      Subs. by G.S.R. 422(E), dated 11th June, 2002 (w.e.f. 11-6-2002).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 755(E), dated 23ed October, 2008, for rule 169 (w.e.f. 27-10-2008). Earlier rule 169
 756.      was added by G.S.R. 285(E) dated 11th May, 2005 (w.e.f. 12-5-2005).
 757.      Ins. by G.S.R. 1230(E), dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018).
 758.      Ins. by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for heading “Memorandum to the Pharmocoposial
 759.      Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM)” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 760.      Ins. by G.S.R. 352(E), dated 1st June, 2006 (w.e.f. 8-6-2006).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 202(E), dated 22nd March, 2021, for “Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian
 761.      Medicine” (w.e.f. 23-3-2021).
 762.      Forms 3 to 7 omitted by Notification No. F. 1-16/57-D, dated 15th June, 1957.
 763.      Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 8 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).
 764.      Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 8A (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). Earlier Form 8A



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 844 of 859
           was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 765.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           Subs. By G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “signed by or on behalf of the manufacturer”
 766.      (w.e.f. 1-1-2003).
 767.      Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 10 (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for Form 10A (w.e.f. 24-8-2001). Earlier Form 10A
 768.      was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 769.      Subs. by G.S.R. 103(E), dated 2nd February, 2017, for “one year” (w.e.f. 2-2-2017).
 770.      Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).
           Added by Notification No. F. 1-36/54-DS, dated 3rd March, 1955 and amended by G.S.R. 753(E),
 771.      dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, for “A fee of rupees fifteen has been credited to
           Government under the Head of Account “ 0210-Medical and Public Health, 04-Public Health, 104-
           Fees and Fines under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945- Central” vide treasury receipt attached.”
 772.      (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).
 773.      Ins. by Notification No. F. 1-36/54-DS, dated 3rd March, 1955.
 774.      Ins. by G.S.R. 604(E), dated 24th August, 2001, (w.e.f. 24-8-2001).
 775.      Subs. by G.S.R. 753(E), dated 4th November, 1999 (w.e.f. 4-11-1999).
 776.      Subs. by G.S.R. 521(E), dated 1st June, 2018, for "for a period of six months" (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).
 777.      Subs, by G.S.R. 59 (E), dated 7th February, 1995 (w.e.f. 7-2-1995).
 778.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970).
 779.      Ins. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010 (w.e.f. 3-5-2010).
 780.      Added by Notification No. 1-3/51-DS, dated 15th October, 1954.
 781.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1594, dated 28th October, 1976 (w.e.f. 13-11-1976).
 782.      The words “cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020).
 783.      Subs. by G.S.R. 926, dated 24th June, 1977 (w.e.f. 16-7-1977).
 784.      The words “or cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020).
 785.      Subs. by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972).
 786.      The words “cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020).
 787.      Ins. By G.S.R. 292(E) dated 29th May, 1997 (w.e.f.29-5-1997)
 788.      The words “or cosmetics” omitted by G.S.R. 763(E), dated 15 th December, 2020 (w.e.f. 15-12-2020).
 789.      Subs. by G.S.R. 592(E), dated 13th August, 2008, for the figure"19" (w.e.f. 13-8-2008).
 790.      Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994).
 791.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970).
 792.      Subs. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 793.      2017).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 794.      2017).
 795.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 796.      Omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 797.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 798.      Subs. by G.S.R. 487(E) dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984).
 799.      Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979).
 800.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 801.      2017).
 802.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 803.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 804.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 805.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 806.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 807.      Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 808.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 809.      Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18-7-2002)
 810.      Subs. by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963.
 811.      Ins. By S.O. 23 (E) dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970).
           Clause 4 omitted by S.O. 289(E) dated 20 th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 3-2-1973). Earlier clause (4) added
 812.      by Notification No. F.1-113/69-D, dated 23rd December, 1969.
 813.      Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979).



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 845 of 859
 814.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 815.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 816.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-35/64-D (G.S.R. 1185), dated 18th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964)
 817.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 818.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-59/68-D (S.O. 4816), dated 19th November , 1969 (w.e.f. 6-12-1969)
 819.      Added by G.S.R 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977).
 820.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-35/64-D (G.S.R. 1185), dated 18th August, 1964 (w.e.f. 22-8-1964)
 821.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 822.      Added by G.S.R 665(E), dated 6th May, 1977 (w.e.f. 28-5-1977) (w.e.f. 28-5-1977).
 823.      Added by Notification no. F.1-14/67-D (G.S.R. 594), dated 3rd February, 1969.
 824.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
           Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R.
 825.      373(E) dated 2nd May, 1983.
 826.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R.
 827.      373(E) dated 2nd May, 1983.
 828.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 829.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 830.      Ins. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994).
 831.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 832.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 833.      Subs. by S.O. 2139(E), dated 5th June, 1972 (w.e.f. 12-8-1972).
 834.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 835.      Condition No. 3 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f.7-1-1986).
 836.      Added by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963.
 837.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 838.      Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965).
 839.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 840.      Subs. by G.S.R. 487(E), dated 2nd July, 1984 (w.e.f. 2-7-1984).
 841.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 842.      SI. No. 4 omitted by G.S.R. 504(E) dated 18th July, 2002 (w.e.f. 18-7-2002)
 843.      Certain words omitted by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 844.      Condition No. 2 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f. 7-1-1986).
 845.      Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965).
 846.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 847.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 848.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 849.      Ins. by G.S.R. 681(E), dated 6th June, 1988 (w.e.f. 6-6-1988).
 850.      Condition No. 2 omitted by G.S.R. 17(E) dated 7 th January 1986 (w.e.f. 7-1-1986).
 851.      Added by Notification No. 1-63/61-D, dated 17th July, 1963.
 852.      Added by Notification No. F.1-113/69-D (S.O. 23), dated 23rd December, 1969 (w.e.f. 3-1-1970)
 853.      Ins. by S.O. 1458(E), dated 27th April, 1965 (w.e.f. 8-5-1965).
 854.      Ins. by G.S.R. 42(E), dated, 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979).
 855.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           FORM 21C omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM
           21C was amended by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) and by G.S.R. 788(E),
 856.      dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
           FORM 21CC omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier
           FORM 21CC was inserted by G.S.R. 42(E), dated 25th January, 1979 (w.e.f. 25-1-1979) and amended
 857.      by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 858.      FORMS 22 and 23 omitted by S.O. 289(E), dated 20th December, 1962.
           The words "OR RENEWAL” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 859.      2017).
 860.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 861.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 862.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 863.      Ins. by S.O. 1196(E), dated 6th May, 1960 (w.e.f. 14-5-1960).
           The words "OR RENEWAL” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 864.      2017).
 865.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 846 of 859
 866.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 867.      Subs. by Notification No. F. 1-598-D (S.O. 4816) dated 19th November, 1969(w.e.f. 6-12-1969).
           Ins. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). Earlier it was omitted by G.S.R.
 868.      1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017)
 869.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
           Subs. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7-1-1983) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R.
 870.      334(E) dated 11th May, 1983.
           Subs. by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17th July, 2019, for “grant” (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). Earlier the word “grant”
 871.      was substituted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017)
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 24D (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form 24D
 872.      was inserted by Notification No. 1-23/6 (S.O. 642), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 24E (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form 24E
 873.      was added by G.S.R. 376(E) dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978).
 874.      Ins. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, (w.e.f. 4-10-2021).
 875.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           The words "OR RENEWAL” omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 876.      2017).
 877.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 878.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 879.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 880.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 881.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 882.      Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992).
           The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October,
 883.      2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 884.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 885       Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 886.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 887.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 888.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October,
 889.      2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 890.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1960.
 891.      Subs. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 892.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October,
 893.      2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 894.      Added by Notification No. F. 1-36/64-D, dated 18th august, 1964.
 895.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 896.      Subs. By G.S.R. 13(E) dated 7th January, 1983 (w.e.f. 7-1-1983)
 897.      Added by S.O. 903(E), dated 10th February, 1976 (w.e.f. 28-2-1976).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 25D (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form 25D
 898.      was added by Notification No. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642), dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 2021, for Form 25E (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form 25E
 899.      was added by G.S.R. 376(E) dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978).
 900.      Ins. By G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 901.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 902.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 903.      Ins. by G.S.R. 923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14-12-1992).
           The words "and any certificate of renewal in force" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th
 904.      October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 905.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).
 906.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           FORM 26 omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM
 907.      26 was substituted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           FORM 26A omitted by G.S.R 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM
 908.      26 was substituted by G.S.R 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           FORM 26B omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM
 909.      26B was substituted by Notification No. F. 1-22/59-D, dated 9th April, 1964.
 910.      Subs. By G.S.R. 370(E), dated 7th April, 1994 (w.e.f. 7-4-1994).



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 847 of 859
 911.      Added by Notification No. 1-23/67-D (S.O. 642(E)) dated 2nd February, 1970 (w.e.f. 21-2-1970).
 912.      Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978).
 913.      Added by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 20th July, 1978 (w.e.f. 20-7-1978).
 914.      Ins. By G.S.R. 198(E) dated 7th March, 2003 (w.e.f. 7-3-2003).
 915.      Subs. by G.S.R. 376(E), dated 3rd May, 2010, for "period of two years" (w.e.f. 4-5-2010).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 202, for Form 26E2-I (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form
 916.      26E2-I was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5 th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 202, for Form 26E2-II (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form
 917.      26E2-II was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5 th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014).
           Subs. by G.S.R. 716(E), dated 1st October, 202, for Form 26E3 (w.e.f. 4-10-2021). Earlier Form 26E3
 918.      was inserted by G.S.R. 153(E) dated 5th March, 2014 (w.e.f. 5-3-2014).
 919.      Ins. By G.S.R. 1230(E) dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018).
 920.      Ins. By G.S.R. 1230(E) dated 21st December, 2018 (w.e.f. 24-12-2018).
           FORM 26F omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017). Earlier FORM
           26F was inserted by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22 nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982) and amended by G.S.R.
           923(E), dated 14th December, 1992 (w.e.f. 14.12.1992), by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4 th June, 1996 (w.e.f.
 921.      4-6-1996).
           Subs. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999, for Form 26G (w.e.f. 5-4-1999). Earlier Form 26G was
 922.      inserted by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993).
 923.      Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANK" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020).
 924.      Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020).
           FORM 26H omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).Earlier FORM
           26H was inserted by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 11 th March , 1996 (w.e.f.11-3-1996) and corrected vide
           corrigendum G.S.R. 513(E) dated 5th November, 1996 and by G.S.R. 26(E) dated 19 th January, 2006
 925.      (w.e.f. 19-1-2006).
 926.      Ins. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999).
 927.      Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011).
           Form 26J omitted by G.S.R. 499(E), dated 17 th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 17-7-2019). Earlier Form 26J was
 928.      inserted by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 929.      2017).
 930.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 931.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 932.      Ins. by G.S.R. 28(E), dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993).
 933.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 934.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 935.      2017).
 936.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985, for FORM 21C (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 937.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
           Subs. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999, for Form 27C(w.e.f. 5-4-1999). Earlier Form 27C was
 938.      inserted by G.S.R. 28(E) dated 22nd January, 1993 (w.e.f. 22-1-1993)
 939.      Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "BLOOD BANK" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020).
 940.      Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020).
 941.      Subs. by G.S.R. 166(E), dated 11th March, 2020, for "Blood Bank" (w.e.f. 11-3-2020).
           Ins. by G.S.R. 119(E) dated 11th March, 1996 (w.e.f.11-3-1996) corrected vide corrigendum G.S.R.
 942.      513(E) dated 5th November, 1996
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 943.      2017).
 944.      Subs. by G.S.R. 26(E) dated 19th January, 2006 (w.e.f. 19-1-2006).
 945.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 946.      Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 17th July, 2012 (w.e.f. 17-7-2012).
           The words "OR RENEWAL" omitted by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27th October, 2017 (w.e.f. 27-10-
 947.      2017).
 948.      Subs. by G.S.R. 1337(E), dated 27 th October, 2017, for "grant/renewal" (w.e.f. 27-10-2017).
 949.      Ins. By G.S.R 245(E) dated 5th April, 1999 (w.e.f. 5-4-1999).
 950.      Ins. by G.S.R. 899(E), dated 27th December, 2011 (w.e.f. 27-12-2011).
 951.      Subs. by G.S.R. 788(E), dated 10th October, 1985 (w.e.f. 10-10-1985).
 952.      Ins. by G.S.R. 462(E), dated 22nd June, 1982 (w.e.f. 22-6-1982).
 953.      Subs. by G.S.R. 231(E), dated 4th June, 1996 (w.e.f. 4-6-1996).



Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India   Page 848 of 859
